                        The book of
                        FELLOWSHIP

                as written by Batlin of Britain

i.  Salutations to the Traveller
Good morning to thee, gentle friend and traveller!
	No matter what time of day it might be when thou 
art reading this - no matter what the hour of the clock - I say 
good morning to thee because this very moment brings to thee 
the coming of the dawn.  The dawn, as everyone knows, is the 
moment when illumination comes.  The dawn marks the end 
of the long dark night, and a new beginning.  It is my humble 
hope that these words may be for thee a dawning, or at least, 
a type of awakening.
	I call thee "traveller" no matter if thou hast never 
left thy home town, no matter if thou wilst never again leave 
thy room, because all of us are travellers.  I call thee traveller 
for truly all of us travel a spiritual or philosophical path - 
even if it is simply by living the life that we choose to live, or 
by searching for a new life when our current one fails to 
satisfy our needs as thinking spiritual beings.
	It is past time that I introduce myself to thee, gentle 
friend and traveller.  My name is Batlin, and indeed I have 
been following this quest all of my life.  It has been a long 
road, but the rewards have been beyond measure.  If thou 
wouldst permit me, I would very much wish appreciate 
sharing these rewards with you.

ii.  The Story of Batlin - Part the First
	There is much that I have set out to tell thee in this 
book.  Some small part of it involves my own personal story.  
As that is the least important part of this book, I shall quickly 
relate my tale first, gentle friend and traveller.  In that way 
we shall soon have it over with and then be free to pass on 
more important concerns!
	I was born in the forests surrounding the city of Yew 
and educated in the traditions of the Druids.  Having been 
raised in the city of Justice, I was taught to always strive for 
fairness in dealing with others, and these teachings left a 
lasting impression upon me.  But while I found trees, birds 
and moons to be very beautiful, I determined to dedicate my 
life to the service of people.  So it was I left to seek my 
fortune in the world.
	This was a time when, over Lord British's 
objections, unruly lords waged war against each other, so 
there was little else to do but become a fighter in the city of 
Jhelom.  I regret killing, although much of what I did helped 
bring peace to our land once more.  I learned well how to 
defend myself and to find the courage one must have to 
survive in battle.  I also learned respect for those of valor who 
earn their wage by combat.  Eventually those little wars 
ended, and I found myself penniless and without a trade in 
the capital city of Britain.
	I became a Bard simply because a Bard was needed 
at the Blue Boar.  There were none about, and I had the 
loudest voice.  Never had I considered myself to be musically 
inclined, but it was a fair alternative to starvation.  My voice 
was painful.  My mandolin strings would break rather than let 
me stroke them.  After much heckling and many a thrown 
bottle, my talents did slowly develop.  As the years passed I 
began to feel the deep compassion that bards known when 
singing of heroic deeds.  I discovered that sharing a spiritual 
rapport with my audience was very moving.  Several of my 
ballads are still sung today (although by tradition, the player 
will no doubt take credit for composing them himself).
	While in Britain, I met two remarkable individuals.  
They were twins, Elizabeth and Abraham.  They were also 
well versed students of philosophy, and many were the hours 
we spent in discussion and debate.  We did raise our voices on 
occasion,
Gentle friend and traveller, but that did not prevent 
us from becoming fast friends.  Although I would never 
presume to intrude upon their privacy by revealing the many 
fascinating details I learned about them and their lives, I will 
say that they play a truly significant role in the part this book 
that is my story.
	A mage from Moonglow who had heard me perform 
came to offer me employment as his assistant.  Magic has 
always fascinated me, and so I became his apprentice.  I will 
always remember his teaching that if I was to successfully 
commune with the visible world without lapsing into 
madness, I must ever retain my honesty - if one is to live 
outside the laws of reality, one must first be honest.  He 
taught me well.  It was with great sadness that I ended my 
studies in the magical arts when my master, who was most 
elderly, passed away.
	While drinking at the Blue Boar soon after his 
passing, Elizabeth, Abraham, and I each decided that we 
needed something to which to dedicate our lives.  On a 
youthful whim, we made a pact that we would go our separate 
ways and spend the next decade travelling throughout the 
land to find adventure, and to find ourselves as well.  We 
agreed to reunite at the Blue Boar in exactly ten years.  Our 
departure was exciting yet melancholy, as my life began a 
new chapter.

iii.  The Old Man and the Bandits
On the road leading out of Britain, I met a man bent with age, 
but still possessed of keen wit.  As we walked he shared with 
me his tale, and I in turn shall share it with thee.
	During a stroll through the woods one day, this man 
was kidnapped by a group of vicious bandits.  The poor man 
had just left his nephew's family and had no one else in the 
world.  Woe to them who have been kidnapped when they 
have no one to pay their ransom!  The bandits soon began to 
loathe their captive and did make plans to kill him.
	One wanted to hang him, while another wanted to 
stab him.  Still another wanted to burn him at the stake while 
yet a fourth wanted to tie rocks about his waist and throw him 
in the river.  So angry did they wax in their disagreement 
over what manner of violence to use, that they did break into 
an awful, bloody row.
	And so it was that this old man did escape from the 
bandits, who were distracted with their brawling.  Upon 
noticing their victim was gone, they continued to fight, this 
time over whose fault it had been, until all of them lay dead, 
murdered by each others' hand.  
	This old man was later reunited with his nephew's 
family and all were joyous of it.  For as he had learned, Unity 
is essential for survival, and unlike those reckless bandits, he 
still wished to live for a good many years yet.

iv.  The Story of Batlin - Part the Second
	My travels took me to Trinsic, and there I 
encountered a group of men at arms with whom I became 
most impressed.  Many fighters I have know were men of 
valorous heart on the battle field, but off it little more than 
thugs.  These men were not mere fighters, but Paladins.  They 
were all skilled swordsmen and expert horsemen, as well as 
learned scholars and perfectly mannered gentlemen.  Above 
all, they were devoted to the preservation of honor.  It was 
with eager gratitude that I accepted their invitation to join 
them.  The following years were filled with excitement, as we 
journeyed through the land, righting wrongs and helping 
those in need!
	During one of our adventures I was injured and 
forced to remain in Minoc while my companions rode on.  A 
healer there told me that without the proper treatment (for 
which he charged outrageous prices) I would most probably 
die!  I angrily sent him away.  After a time I did mend.  I had 
learned that the healing process takes place mostly in one's 
mind and have since placed no trust in healers who greedily 
prey upon the afflicted.
	At that time, the town of Minoc was in need of a 
Tinker.  As I heard, I supported myself by fixing, building 
and inventing things.  I had never before realized how much 
a town is reliant upon its Tinker, nor how appreciative the 
local townspeople are to those who sacrifice themselves to 
continuously solving the problems of others.  So welcome did 
they make me feel that I stayed for several years.
	Then, filled with the urge to roam and longing for 
the outdoors once more, I joined a band of Rangers in 
Spiritwood.  Rangers are a deeply spiritual people.  Living 
with them reminded me very much of my druid childhood in 
Yew - with one big difference.  These Rangers drank the 
most wonderful wine I have ever tasted!  The bottles came 
from the old winery at Skara Brae, having survived the 
terrible fires which ravaged that island.  Later I made a 
pilgrimage to the desolate ruins of Skara Brae and there I had 
a spiritual experience so profound that I have vowed never to 
relate it to anyone.
	Leaving their band, I gave away all of my 
possessions and for months I wandered aimlessly.  
Eventually, I arrived at New Magincia where I sought 
employment as a Shepherd.  Most of the following two years 
was spent in perfect solitude, living in complete humility.  It 
was an experience that left me significantly changed.  When I 
noticed that ten years had almost passed, I began the journey 
back to Britain.

v.  The Two Brothers and the Trickster
	On the road back to Britain I noticed a small mine 
being worked by two brothers.  They greeted me suspiciously 
but eventually shared with me their tale, and I shall share it 
with thee.
	Their father died and left them a map to some 
unclaimed land that contained valuable minerals.  By law a 
claim can only be made in one name, and this led the brothers 
into conflict.  One brother was the eldest, the other was more 
worldly- both wanted the claim.  They became so fearful 
that the other would make the claim that each spent all his 
time spying on the other.  No work was done.
	One day, they met a stranger who said he was a 
mining engineer.  They did not trust him at first, but he 
assured them that their claim was too small to be of interest.  
He was on the way to stake a much larger claim.  The 
stranger turned their heads with tales of the riches they could 
have, replacing their distrust with avarice.
	The brothers asked the stranger to make their claim 
for them, and went back to working their mine.  They worked 
without stopping for months, and afterward travelled to the 
mint to sell their ore.
	At the mint they learned the stranger had staked 
their claim in his own name and then sold it outright for a 
fortune.  As the brothers had taken ore from land they did not 
own, they were sent to prison in Yew for many years.
Their sad fate taught them to be more trusting of each other, 
for a man who does not trust his brother is always vulnerable.  
After hearing their tale, I went to the mint, for I was curious 
which of the two brothers held the claim to their new mine.  I 
had tried to guess and was quite surprised when I saw the 
answer.  It was in the name of their father.

vi.  The Creation of The Fellowship
I was overjoyed when Elizabeth and Abraham both arrived at 
the Blue Boar safe and sound.  It was a splendid reunion.  
The tales they told me were truly astounding, gentle friend 
and traveller.  But as I have mentioned, I do not wish this 
tome to be and intrusion upon their privacy.
	Not all of our memories were pleasant ones.  Most of 
the people of Britannia, it seemed, were more interested in 
helping themselves than in helping their fellow person.  As 
travellers - strangers wherever we went - we had become 
used to the cold eye of suspicion upon us.  Everywhere there 
were people who expected something for nothing, as if owed 
a debt by the world.  Most of all, each of us had met many 
people who were fundamentally unhappy.  Everywhere there 
were people who knew that they needed something in their 
lives, gentle friend and traveller, but that they had not a hope 
of finding it.
	The three of us had learned much of history.  There 
was once a time when life was infinitely more fragile, but was 
cherished much more dearly.  We yearned to recapture that 
aspect of Britannia's former glory.  After much discussion, 
we decided to found a society called The Fellowship.  At this 
time I was also conceiving what would become its philosophy, 
but that will be discussed further in another chapter.  It was 
Abraham who suggested that I propose The Fellowship to 
Lord British.  I agreed, little realizing the task I was 
undertaking.

vii.  The Ratification of Wise Lord British
	It was with much anxiety that I stood before the 
throne of wise Lord British.  I was in a long line of subjects as 
our Liege made numerous pronouncements.  Although I had 
been waiting for hours when I at last had my audience, I still 
felt unprepared.  His unwavering glance fell on me.
	I said that I had a modest proposal.  My colleagues 
and I sought to establish a philosophical society known as 
The Fellowship.  Lord British asked me who would see the 
benefits of this Fellowship. I replied that no one would benefit 
from it, for it would not be run for profit.  With a word I was 
dismissed.  I found myself leaving the throne room before it 
had even sunk in that I had been refused.

By the look on my face Elizabeth and Abraham knew I was 
not the bearer of good news.  In discussing the matter, 
Elizabeth suggested that Lord British had desired a tribute 
from us.  If we could present an impressive enough tribute, he 
would grant his favor.  After a time we raised a thousand gold 
pieces by selling nearly every possession we owned.  With 
renewed confidence I returned to the castle.
	This time there were several women with me to carry 
the chests of gold that were our tribute.  As I reached the 
front of the line I spoke boldly.  I said that I wished to discuss 
The Fellowship, but first wished to present Lord British with 
suitable tribute.  With consternation I realized that I had 
spoken before Lord British had finished reading an important 
looking scroll placed before him by one of his advisors.  He 
signed it as he spoke, not even bothering to look up at me.  
First he ordered my workmen to remove the boxes.  The he 
ordered the workmen to remove me as well!
	Angrily I stormed from the throne room.  Once more 
did I face my two friends.  We were most disappointed.  The 
dream we shared now seemed to have no hope of becoming 
reality.  I spent days somberly brooding over my failure.  One 
morning found me so completely lost in my thoughts that I 
did not hear the passing beggar approach.  When at last I 
noticed him he spoke.  "A coin for one denied the rewards of 
worthiness."  The illumination was pure and instantaneous.  
He thought I had gone mad when I gave him my chest full of 
gold.  I ran back to the palace as fast as I could.
	At first, Lord British would not see me, but I 
implored him.  He looked me over, and seemed to see 
something different about me.  He listened as I spoke.
	"Our society, The Fellowship, will be a union of 
spiritual seekers that shall strive to bring Unity to our 
fractured society.  We will promote Trust and understanding 
among all the people of Britannia.  With your approval our 
society will teach one to seek Worthiness, rather than mere 
personal reward.  To that end, I seek your recognition of The 
Fellowship."
	After a long moment, Lord British replied.
	"Batlin, thou dost know the meaning of 
perseverance.  I care not for what thy Fellowship dost wish of 
me and I care even less for what thy Fellowship would seek to 
do for me.  But if thy Fellowship would seek to serve the 
subjects of my land then my support is unequivocal."
	Thus was born The Fellowship.

viii.  The Value of Virtues and the Virtue of Values
	In creating the Fellowship philosophy I had no 
intention of cobbling together a collection of platitudes that 
would be presumptuously intended as a replacement of the 
Eight Virtues of The Avatar.  I knew there would be those 
who would accuse me of doing just that, no matter what 
philosophy I developed!  I hereby wish to state that The 
Fellowship fully supports the Eight Virtues of the Avatar, and 
as one who has endeavored to follow their example I can 
personally assure thee of their immeasurable worth.
	But as one who has followed the Eight Virtues, I 
know whereof I speak when I say that it is impossible to 
perfectly live up to them.  Even the Avatar was unable to do 
so continuously and consistently.  Can anyone say that they 
have been honest every moment of every day of their lives?  
Can anyone say that they are always compassionate, valorous, 
just, sacrificing, honorable, humble or spiritual at all times?  
The philosophy of the Eight Virtues does little more than 
emphasize our own personal deficiencies.  I have met many 
adherents  to the ways of the Virtues who are racked with 
guilt over what they perceive to be their spiritual failures, for 
that is what the Virtues are based upon. Having been shown 
our weaknesses, now is the time to strengthen them. The 
philosophy of The Fellowship has been created to eradicate 
the failures from one's life. It is a philosophy based upon 
success and it enhances everything that has come before it. 
The Fellowship philosophy can be expressed as three values 
derived from the personal experiences of my life. They are 
known as The Triad of Inner Strength

ix. The Triad of Inner Strength
The Triad of Inner Strength is a rigorous mental discipline. It 
takes concentrated effort to apply this triad of values to thy 
life. But in doing so thou will see a change in thy life so 
significant that thou shalt no longer be able to look at the 
world in the same way again.
	The first value of The Triad Of Inner Strength is 
expressed as "Strive For Unity." People apply this value to 
their lives by working together to achieve that which shall 
benefit everyone in a state of mutual cooperation. We have 
seen by the parable of "The Old Man and the Bandits" how 
Unity is essential. If we are not working together then we are 
certainly working against each other.
	The second value of The Triad Of Inner Strength is 
expressed as "Trust Thy Brother." People apply this value to 
their lives by dealing with others without accusations or 
suspicions that limit others and themselves. We have seen by 
the parable of "The Two Brothers and the Trickster" just how 
vulnerable lack of Trust makes on. Without Trust we restrict 
ourselves from that which we wish to accomplish.
	The third value of The Triad Of Inner Strength is 
expressed as "Worthiness Precedes Reward." People apply 
this value to their lives by placing a greater emphasis on their 
accomplishments rather than on personal gain. We have seen 
by the parable of "The Ratification of Wise Lord British" that 
one must not expect something for nothing. Blindly chasing 
reward is a path that leads nowhere.

x. The Philosophy of The Fellowship
The scholarly name for the Fellowship philosophy - which I 
did not personally coin - is "sanguine cognition." This is 
merely an important-sounding way of saying "cheerful 
knowledge," and that is as accurate a description of The 
Fellowship philosophy as any I can imagine.
	As long as on maintains his confidence and 
hopefulness one is continuously open to the opportunities that 
perpetually exist in life. I firmly believe that, gentle friend 
and traveller, and thou shouldst believe it as well.
	Without confidence, one does not perceive the world 
correctly and hence one misses opportunities. This sad sate of 
"fevered" reason currently holds the majority of the 
population in its icy grip.
	Such "fevered" persons begin to adapt illusory 
notions to their thinking and entangle themselves in twisted, 
conflicting emotions which reinforce their failures. These sad 
people become afraid of themselves. They begin to believe 
that they will fail, and this belief can become a self-fulfilling 
prophecy.
	Such a fevered person, whether he realizes it or not, 
desperately needs to recognize that the world is not a tangled 
know of failure. The entire process of thought needs to be 
permanently fixed to a confident nature. Such a person needs 
to "find the best in himself," and accept his basic worth. This 
is rarely an easy task. It requires a reflection upon one's self 
that can be emotionally painful. But as we say in The 
Fellowship, "Sometimes one must face harm in order to find 
healing." Upon achieving Recognition one will follow his 
own inner voice of reason that will guide him through life 
and help him avoid failure.
	One of the most difficult things to accept is how 
reliant we are upon others. We fear the rejection, the real or 
imagined hidden motives, and the potential deceit of others. 
Accepting our inevitable reliance upon others as an integral 
part of our role in this world requires the courage to walk on 
fire.
	To achieve the recognition necessary to break free of 
the fever, one must dedicate every fibre of being to 
accomplishing that end. We of The Fellowship travel that 
path, and I extend my invitation to thee, gentle friend and 
traveller, to join us. Together we shall reach our destination. 


                        A Reinterpretation of the
                               HISTORY OF
                                BRITANNIA
Being in part a collection of historical facts with a modern
interpretation thereof supplied by the author, Batlin of 
Britain

i. Ancient Sosaria
Long ago, before the formation of the kingdom of Britannia, 
the land was known as Sosaria. It was little more than a 
multitude of warring city-states and feudal fiefdoms, and the 
people of the land suffered for it.
	It was wise Lord British, then ruler of the city-state 
of Britain, who eventually brought the land and the people of 
Sosaria together.

ii. The Ages of Darkness
The Ages of Darkness are well named, for they were a time 
when dark terrors walked the land. It may also be said that 
during the Ages of Darkness, the peoples of Sosaria were the 
furthest from illumination, for this was truly a time when 
spiritual pursuits were at their ebb.

iii. The Tale that is Called `The First Age of Darkness'
In the beginning of the First Age of Darkness is marked by 
the coming of a sorcerer named Mondain. The father of 
Mondain had refused to share his secret of immortality with 
his son, and their disputes ultimately led to the father's death. 
Torn with anguish and no doubt by his fears of persecution, 
Mondain turned his dark powers against the kingdoms of 
Sosaria. 
	In desperation, Lord British called forth a champion 
to rise to the defense of the realm. The hero who responded to 
his summons would many years later come to be known as 
the Avatar. It was through the actions of this Avatar that 
Mondain's foul gem of power was shattered and Mondain 
himself did come to a very sad end indeed.

iv. The Tale That is Called `Revenge of the Enchantress'
The triumph of the Avatar did not last long, for in slaying 
Mondain he brought the wrath of Minax down upon the land. 
Minax was the young lover of Mondain and a sorceress with 
magical powers even greater than Mondain's. She had the 
power to command legions of foul creatures, and in her quest 
for vengeance over the death of her lover, she brought much 
misery to the people of Sosaria.
	Again the hero who would come to be known as the 
Avatar returned to Britannia in the first recorded use of the 
Moongates. The Avatar slew Minax's minions and did 
eventually destroy her as well.
	While there have been speculations as to the 
motivations of the Avatar, there is insufficient evidence to 
show that the Avatar was driven to violence by jealousy over 
Mondain's romantic involvement with Minax. That being 
said, such theories are hereby denounced and should not be 
given consideration.

v. The Tale that is Called `Exodus'
No one in all of Sosaria, not even the Avatar, could have 
realized that by ending the lives of Mondain and Minax, the 
Avatar would be orphaning their only child. The name of this 
unusual child was Exodus, and he was neither machine nor 
human. Exodus rose from the bottom of the Great Ocean to 
carry out a campaign of revenge and destruction against the 
land of Sosaria.
	So terrible were the forces unleashed by Exodus that 
the hero whom we would come to know as the Avatar 
required the assistance of the mysterious being known as the 
Time Lord to thwart them. And thus it was that the Avatar 
did deal with Exodus in a similar manner as he had dealt 
with his mother and father.
	Since that time much speculation has been given to 
the potentially immeasurable good such a creature as Exodus 
could have brought the land had he been persuaded to become 
beneficent, but I wish to formally disagree with those who say 
the Avatar should have handled the situation differently

vi. The Rise of Britannia
After the smiting of Exodus, the people of Sosaria, who lived 
in terror during the onslaught of these evil magical beings, 
did unite together as a measure of self-protection under the 
sovereign rule of Lord British. Thus was formed the kingdom 
of Britannia.
	Led by wise Lord British, the land did come to 
flourish. The eight major townships rose upon the 
foundations of the old city-states. A renaissance of culture 
and civilization was highlighted by the formation of great 
institutions devoted to the study and advancement of the arts 
and sciences.

vii. The Tale that is Called `Quest of the Avatar'
It was at this time of growth and prosperity in the kingdom of 
Britannia that Lord British put out a call for one to show the 
way of spiritual growth and virtue. The call was answered by 
the hero who would come to be known as the Avatar.
	It was at this time that the champion of Britannia did 
come to earn the title of `Avatar' by establishing the Eight 
Virtues and by seizing the Codex of Ultimate Wisdom from 
the depths of the Stygian Abyss.
	It has been said that the primary motivation of the 
Avatar has been personal redemption for the fate of Mondain, 
Minax and Exodus. While there has been no proof of this, I 
say that even if it were true, all the positive things brought 
forth in the world through the virtues would be enough to 
make amends for almost any misdoing.

viii. The Tale that is Called `Warriors of Destiny'
It seems that by removing the Codex of Ultimate Wisdom the 
Avatar had inadvertently set into motion a cosmic chain of 
events which led to the release of three Shadowlords from 
remnant shards of the black gem of Mondain. These 
Shadowlords were sinister agents of evil. Soon they managed 
to dethrone Lord British and hold him prisoner in a foul 
dungeon. Denied his wisdom and compassion, the kingdom 
of Britannia quickly grew oppressive and cruel.
	This was the Britannia that greeted the return of the 
Avatar. After a score of valiant struggles, Lord British was 
liberated, his throne regained and the Shadowlords banished 
from our world.
	However, Lord British's escape from the underworld 
did cause a tremendously destructive series of earthquakes as 
the vast network of subterranean caverns collapsed. Much of 
the gargoyle race did perish in that tragic cataclysm.

ix. The Tale that is Called `The False Prophet'
After the tremors that shook Britannia subsided, gargoyles, 
inhabitants of the other side of the world who now found their 
homeland virtually destroyed, began to appear on the 
Britannian side of the world in increasing numbers as 
aggressors. They launched vicious attacks against the human 
race and many were they who lost their lives in defense of our 
realm.
	The gargoyles even attempted to assassinate the 
Avatar. They set a Moongate trap which lured the Avatar into 
their clutches, but the Avatar was rescued by his companions. 
So it was that Lord British did once again call upon his 
champion to set the world right. Ending this violent racial 
conflict was the greatest challenge that the Avatar had ever 
faced.
	At last is was revealed that the Codex of Ultimate 
Wisdom, which had been removed from the underworld by 
the Avatar, was actually the property of the gargoyles. 
Therefore, the Avatar placed the Codex into the great ethereal 
void where it would be possessed by neither human nor 
gargoyle. Two lenses, used to view the Codex, were given to 
Lord British and the gargoyle ruler King Draxinusom. As the 
cause of the conflict between the two races had been removed, 
it was hoped that the rift between the two would eventually be 
closed.
	Those who would say that this terrible and 
destructive war could have been prevented entirely had the 
Avatar not appropriated the Codex from its true owners are 
merely dissidents who are grossly misinformed

x. The Last Two Hundred Years
It has been two centuries since the Avatar last appeared in our 
good kingdom. Some have written that at last it is possible to 
interpret the tales of the Avatar as they should be, with the 
proper historical perspective. Some argue that as time moves 
on, the truth of what actually occurred will fade even further 
away and that we have a responsibility to preserve the legends 
as we now know them. However, most agree when it comes to 
a number of basic theories.
	While there are those who maintain that the stories 
of the Avatar are only myths, practically all credible scholars 
say that at least some elements of the Avatar's tales are 
historical fact. In reality, one need look no further than the 
Isle of the Avatar to see very persuasive evidence that the 
Avatar did indeed exist - at least as a person if not as a 
spiritual being!
	It is most likely that there has been more than one 
Avatar. All of the writings insist that the Avatar who 
negotiated the peace between Britannia and the gargoyles is 
the one and same person who first appeared to vanquish the 
sorcerer Mondain those many years ago. While saying it is 
most unlikely, historians do not firmly deny the possibility of 
there having been only on Avatar. After all, our good 
sovereign monarch, wise Lord British, has himself displayed 
an amazing longevity!
	Whatever interpretation of history proves to be most 
accurate, it seems undeniable that the Avatar will not return 
to our fair kingdom. By all indications the age of magic is 
coming to an end. With the decline on reliability of mages, 
and with the kingdom turning away from the magical arts, it 
is doubtful that extreme danger - that which would require an 
Avatar's aid to defeat it - will ever return to Britannia. And 
thankfully so.
	Upon us is the age of The Fellowship, in which one 
does not simply wait in anticipation for a heroic savior when 
a crisis occurs. In this less spectacular but more practical day, 
we are left to solve our problems with our own minds and our 
own will.

                        The Fellowship
                         TRAVELLER'S
                          COMPANION
                guide to travelling in Britannia,
                 as written by Batlin of Britain

i. The Cities and Towns of Britannia
Built upon the foundations of the ancient city-states of 
Sosaria, the towns of Britain, Jhelom, Minoc, Moonglow, 
New Magincia, Trinsic, and Yew have risen up to become 
major cities in their own right. Numerous other cities have 
also grown and doing so deserve recognition as proud jewels 
in the crown of Britannia. All of these cities are described 
below, being listed in alphabetical order for the sake of the 
traveller's convenience in using this book as a reference 
guide.

Buccaneer's Den
This island is the notorious home of pirates and thieves. It is 
a place that is not without risks and dangers - especially if 
one is too free in displaying one's money. Still, Buccaneer's 
Den has attracted many travellers in recent years with the 
lurid thrill of its well-monied House of Games and sensuous 
indoor Baths. It is also a place where one may purchase many 
exotic goods.

Britain
This is the opulent and majestic capital of Britannia, famed 
city of Compassion, and it is where thou mayest find the 
Castle of Lord British. Britain is built on the shore of 
Britanny Bay. It is easily the largest city in all of Britannia 
and it has seen much new development. It is the home of the 
historic Wayfarer's Inn, Royal Theatre and the Music Hall. It 
is a center of commerce for the entire kingdom. Here in 
Britain thou will find vendors hawking their wares, a 
Farmer's Market, shops of every type and fabulous 
entertainment for everyone. Britain is also home to the 
headquarters of The Fellowship.


Cove
The city of Cove is the cleanest city in all of Britannia. 
Although the city itself is pristine, a traveller would be wise 
to avoid Lock Lake, which has become very polluted in recent 
years. One of the most romantic places in all of Britannia is 
the "Lovers' Walk," which is not far from the Shrine. Across 
the mountains from Cove the traveller will find the Bloody 
Marsh, site of one of Britannia's most savage wars.

Isle of the Avatar
While no formal city has ever been built upon the Isle of the 
Avatar, it is such a place of interest that it is included here in 
this section. This strange volcanic island - which arose from 
the tumultuous upheaval of the Great Stygian Abyss - receives 
numerous visitors on pilgrimage to the Shrine of the Codex. 
The Shrine is considered to be a national monument of great 
historical importance to Britannia and as such is under armed 
guard day and night.

Jhelom
Located in the Valorian Isles in southwest Britannia, Jhelom 
is a meeting place for fighters, paladins, and rangers. It is the 
birthplace of many an esteemed Britannian warrior. This city 
of Valor is also known for its well-stocked armoury, the 
hospitality of its barmaids and for its local fighting club, the 
Library of Scars.

Minoc
This thriving seaport is located in northern Britannia at the 
mouth of Lost Hope Bay. Minoc, also known as the city of 
Sacrifice, has an active sawmill, armourer, shipwright and 
branch of the Britannian Mining Company. It is the home of 
the Artist's Guild, where craftsmen of all types display their 
craft. In Minoc there is also an active branch of The 
Fellowship.

Moonglow
Moonglow is the city of Honesty and sits upon the southern 
tip of Verity Isle. It is where the Lycaeum, the great 
storehouse of knowledge and wisdom, is located. Nearby, the 
traveller will also find the observatory, which contains a 
orrery. An active branch of The Fellowship also operates in 
Moonglow.

New Magincia
New Magincia is known as the city of Humility, and hence it 
chooses to remain isolated from much of the rest of Britannia. 
If thou venture there, thou will find that the people are 
basically shy, but also warm and hospitable once they have 
gotten used to thee. The city is located on an eastern island 
well past most of the main trade routes. Time progresses more 
slowly in New Magincia than anywhere else in Britannia. The 
economy of New Magincia is based on shipbuilding, 
horticulture and raising sheep.

Paws
Paws is a small coastal village that, because of the continuous 
expansion of the capital city, has essentially merged with 
Britain. While there was a time when this village held a 
quaint rustic charm, in more recent years the village of Paws 
has languished in poverty. A terrible, seven-year drought has 
forced the closure of many of the local farms. The industry of 
paws consists primarily of milling flour, dairy farming and 
meat curing. Paws is where The Fellowship runs its shelter 
for the poor.

Serpent's Hold
This opulent castle fortress is home of the honorable Order of 
the Silver Serpent, the training camp for the armed 
militiamen of Britannia. Here fighting men learn more than 
just the martial arts. They are taught honor and valor as well. 
Instruction in the ways of the warrior may be obtained and 
one may purchase reliable weapons, armour and provisions 
here. The Meditation Retreat of The Fellowship is located on 
an island east of Serpent's Hold.


Skara Brae
This sad town was once know as the city of Spirituality. Few 
are those who venture to the spot where the city of Skara Brae 
once stood, near the mystic forest of Spiritwood, for all that 
remains are buildings that stand nearly deserted. While there 
have been many strange stories as to the going-on in this 
uninhabited place, there are few who would seek to verify 
them. The wise traveller avoids Skara Brae altogether.

Spektran
The sparse isle of Spektran is ruled by the notorious Sultan of 
Spektran. The sultan is renowned for his unfriendliness to 
outsiders, and Spektran is not recommended to travellers.

Terfin
Terfin is the home of the gargoyles, built upon the island once 
occupied by Sutek the Mad. Most gargoyles travel daily to 
Minoc in order to work in the mines. In Terfin one may find 
the gargoyle Hall of Knowledge and an active Fellowship 
branch. Not far from Terfin are the ancient ruins that were 
once the palace of the traitorous Blackthorn.

Trinsic
This active seaport south of Paws and north of the Cape of 
Heroes is known as the city of Honor. Trinsic is the home of 
Paladins and also has an active branch of The Fellowship. 
Travellers might question the need for the walls that surround 
the city. As if this would not be enough to keep the city 
secure, the guards of the city will not permit anyone to enter 
or leave the city unless they know the secret password. While 
this was once done to maintain the security of the city and the 
safety of its citizens, it is now done mostly to sustain a 
traditional ritual. (Britannian law forbids the open publication 
of Trinsic's password.)

Vesper
Located on the edge of the desert in northeast Britannia, 
Vesper is an industrial town. Here the main branch of the 
Britannian Mining Company is located. Vesper is one of the 
few places in Britannia where humans and gargoyles live 
together in an approximately equal number.

Yew
Yew is known as the city of Justice, but it has changed 
considerably over the years. The buildings that remain where 
the city once stood have been abandoned for many, many 
years. The citizenry of Yew have chosen a life independent of 
normal civilization. They now live scattered throughout the 
Great Forest. Their only remaining link with outside 
civilization is Empath Abbey. The Abbey has assumed 
responsibility for the court of Yew as well as its prison. Many 
travellers to Empath Abbey come to visit the graves of loved 
ones at the nearby graveyard.

ii. The Commerce of Britannia
Britannia is not only a kingdom of great cities, but also of 
prolific commerce and industrial might. In any city, thou 
canst find a pleasing variety of goods and services available 
for purchase. Each city has an economy based upon its 
industry and the endeavors of the people who work within it. 
The goods each city produces are bartered or sold to the 
people of other cities, which provides them access to other 
goods not usually available in their own city. Through this 
continuous flurry of commercial activity all the townships of 
Britannia are supplied with the products and services that 
they need to survive and thrive.

The Farmers of Britannia
While in recent years a series of droughts has hurt 
agricultural production in certain areas of Britannia, most 
farmers are enjoying a resurgence of bountiful harvests. 
Farmers will usually be glad to sell the passing traveller eggs, 
fruits, vegetables or whatever else they produce.

The Merchants of Britannia
The merchants of Britannia survive by one basic rule - buy for 
less and the sell for more. However, most merchants truly 
desire to please their customers, and any merchant who 
engages in unfair business practices is sure to lose out to his 
competition in the end.

The Farmer's Market
At the Farmer's Market in Britain, the fruits, vegetables, eggs 
and meats produced on the farms of Britannia may be found 
for sale.

Pubs
In a Pub one may relax and enjoy a refreshing drink or a fine 
meal. In many pubs one will hear the local bard sing rousing 
songs of legend and lore. When conversing with the other 
patrons of a pub, be prepared to hear anecdotes, war stories, 
local history - perhaps even useful information!

Food Vendors
For a quick meal one could do no better than to sample the 
wares of the local food vendor. To find the local food vendor, 
one need only listen for his friendly bark and call.

Provisioners
There is no end to the number of odd things that a traveller of 
adventurer may find himself in need of, and the one place 
where nearly all of these might be found for sale is the local 
Provisioner's Shop.

Stables
There is no faster mode of land travel that riding in a 
horsedrawn wagon. When travelling in the wilderness, the 
quicker one is, the safer one is. Horses and carts can be 
purchased from the stables in Britain.

Magical Reagents
Now that magic is severely on the decline, those who still 
pursue this dying art may find that many mages are willing to 
sell their magical reagents. One need not concern oneself 
with the freshness of these reagents, for all things magical 
only increase in potency with age.

Inns
The inns of Britannia provide the traveller with safety and a 
place to rest. Camping in the wilderness is always a risky 
proposition and the danger to one's health is great, especially 
in time of inclement weather.

Craftsman
The craftsmen of Britannia are skilled artisans who sell wares 
made by their own hand. While such items are often of high 
price, the price reflects compensation due for the time, toil 
and talent of the craftsman, as seen in the high quality of the 
item.

Armourers
Here one may purchase armour and shields made for the 
protection of a fighting man in combat. Most armourers will 
also sell weapons, thus completely preparing any would-be 
fighter. Armour is generally sold piecemeal, but certain 
armourers have been known to sell entire suits at a cheaper 
price than the total cost of each individual piece.

Fletchers and Bowyers
Without question, the bowyer that is held in highest regard 
throughout all of Britannia is Iolo Fitzowen, the proprietor of 
the establishment that has come to be called "Iolo's Bows." 
So popular is this bowyer's shop that a similar establishment 
was set up in Serpent's Hold.


Healers
Many who succumb to injury or illness have their conditions 
worsened and their purses lightened by a healer. The wise 
traveller knows that sickness and injury is rooted chiefly in 
the mind and that only through self-discipline can pain, 
illness and injury be overcome.

Apothecaries
It is the shrewd apothecary who mixes his strange chemicals 
and produces the formulas to create potions. Apothecaries 
have long since stopped the sale of magical reagents, as 
magic has become so unreliable.

Clothiers
The marketplace of Britain provides the traveller with an 
opportunity to purchase clothing, ranging from the latest 
fashions to the more comfortable and functional.

Shipwrights
Ships may be purchased from shipwrights in nearly any 
coastal city. By Britannian law no ship is considered to be 
legally held unless the owner has in his possession that ship's 
deed of sale.

iii. The Rune Writing of Britannia

Following a tradition that has been passed down from 
generation to generation for centuries, many signs and 
placards in Britannia are written in a unique and attractive 
runic script that was once the language of the druids. This 
strange writing is older than Britannia itself. While the 
presence of such writing might befuddle a casual tourist, the 
wise traveller knows that it is a worthwhile pursuit to learn 
the meaning of this writing.
	Nowadays, the use of rune writing is beginning to 
fall out of fashion, and its use generally denotes an 
establishment that clings to an antiquated style of operation.

iv. The Arms of Britannia

It is the wise party of travellers who make sure that they are 
well armoured and heavily armed when travelling in the 
wilderness. To that end, the following is a brief introduction 
to the armour and weapons that one may use to insure one's 
safety.

Armour and Shields
There are six parts of the body that one does seek to protect: 
the head, torso, the legs, the hands, the feet and the neck. All 
pieces of armour are specifically designed for the protection 
of one of these places.
There are basically four types of armour: leather, scale, 
chainmail, and plate. Leather provides the least protection, 
but it is exceedingly light and is relatively inexpensive. While 
scale and chainmail provide roughly the same level of 
protection, scale is the heavier and the less expensive of the 
two. The heaviest type of armour is plate; since it provides 
great protection, it is also the most expensive.
	Unless one is armed with a weapon that requires the 
use of two hands, a wise combatant, in addition to wearing 
armour, will also carry a shield. Generally, the more 
protection a shield provides, the heavier it is.
	One can quickly see that such activities as fleeing 
from a superior opponent, carrying a full load of equipment, 
or travelling a great distance become quite daunting tasks if 
one is heavily armoured. Therefore, the wise traveller 
moderates the type of armour worn, taking into account one's 
own physical strength, the combined weight of any other 
items one may wish to carry and the distance one expects to 
be travelling

Weaponry
There is such a great variety of weaponry available in 
Britannia that it is impossible to properly examine all of it in 
this short space. The wise traveller knows that it is important 
is to select for oneself the most fitting weapon. After all, the 
weapon itself is not nearly as important as the one who uses 
it. The choice of a weapon should be tailored around the user 
and not vice versa. What are the factors one considers when 
choosing a weapon?
	Many weapons such as pole arms and the larger 
swords are heavy enough to require the use of both hands. If 
one is not of sufficient strength, attempting to wield a two-
handed sword could be worse than fighting unarmed. 
Generally, the smaller and lighter a weapon is, the easier it is 
to conceal and quicker it is with which to strike. It is not by 
accident that the simple dagger is the weapon of choice for 
many an assassin.
	A weapon of great length, such as a spear of two-
handed hammer, can be used to keep one's opponent at bay as 
well as to attack him. The advantage of reach has decided the 
day in many a battle. Likewise, a long weapon is a proven 
disadvantage when the fight is in cramped quarters. Edged 
weapons such as a sword must be handled with precision - it 
is usually not enough to simply contact one's opponent. The 
skilled combatant knows how to use the cutting edge of his 
weapon to its greatest advantage.
	Blunt weapons such as maces, clubs and hammers 
enable the combatant to concentrate raw strength in the 
delivery of crushing blows to one's opponent. The 
punishment of such mighty impacts has often been the key to 
achieving victory.
	The strategic effectiveness of well placed missile fire 
cannot be over-emphasized. On many occasions an 
outnumbered party has been able to repel an attach through 
the proper application of missile weaponry. The disadvantage 
of bows, crossbows, and slings is that loading them requires 
the use of both hands. Bows and crossbows also require two 
hands to fire. Daggers, axes, torches and spears can also be 
effective as improvised missile weapons.

v. The History and Customs of the Adventurer Classes

The Fighter Class
Many Britannian fighters receive formal training in the 
martial arts at Serpent's Hold, and in return they serve for a 
specified term as members of the Royal Militia. Some fighters 
study in Jhelom or with other trainers across Britannia. Other 
fighters never receive any formal training. Their unforgiving 
teacher is the battlefield, where many lives are lost when 
lessons are not mastered quickly enough.  Fighters generally 
possess great strength and endurance, a proficiency with 
many types of weapons and the courage to face the 
demanding trials of combat time and time again.

The Bard Class
A true jack-of-all-trades - a trickster, a minstrel, a battler, a 
spellcaster - the bard possesses all of these skills. Physically, 
the bard falls somewhere between the brawny physique of the 
fighter and the delicate frame of the mage. The bard is 
dextrous and agile. He tends to be more clever than 
intelligent. He also possesses a presence and charm that come 
in handy in all manner of situations. The bard has a natural 
gift for missile weapons and a mind for riddles. The bard also 
plays an important part in society by recording local history 
in such a way that it is well remembered, through rousing tale 
and song.

The Mage Class
A pity to those who live their lives following the treacherous 
road that is the way of the mage, now that the time of magic 
is coming to an end. The days of wonder, when miracles 
could be performed on demand through wisdom and a 
devotion to the arcane arts, are a part of the past. A mage's 
mind perceives that which resides in the invisible world, but 
as recent history has shown us, but this keen mind upon 
which the mage depends is ever in danger of slipping into 
lunacy.
	What is also tragic is that the way of the mage is not 
one that is consciously chosen. One is born with the calling of 
the mage. While magic has not yet ceased to function 
altogether, it has become inaccurate to the point of being 
unreliable, making the mage's life one of constant 
uncertainty

A Bestiary of Britannia
The wilderness of Britannia is the home of a multitude of 
strange beasts and magical creatures. While many creatures 
are mundane and harmless,  others are terribly dangerous and 
barely understood. For the traveller it is vitally important to 
be able to recognize any type of beast that may be encountered 
so that one can respond accordingly. The following is a list of 
beasts now known to live in Britannia.

Acid Slug - This very unpleasant creature tends to inhabit 
dark places underground. Its skin exudes secretions of acid 
that can burn flesh and are especially damaging to metal. The 
best weapon to use against this monster is fire.

Alligator - This vicious man-eating creature lives in swampy 
terrain and can inflict heavy damage with its bite and tail.

Bat (Giant) - This large winged rodent attacks by night, 
aided by it's night vision and acute hearing. Its body is very 
light and fragile.

Bee (Giant) - This energetic flying insect will instantly attack 
anything that it perceives as a threat to its hive. It attacks 
with a sleep-inducing poisonous sting.

Bird - This type of creature is not openly hostile to human 
beings, but will probably attack if provoked or frightened.

Cat - A domestic animal commonly found in city alleyways, 
this creature performs an invaluable service in continuously 
thinning the rat population.

Centipede (Giant) - This large, multi-legged insect frequents 
cool, dark places. Its poison is considered to be among the 
most deadly of any creature. It can be destroyed by fire. 

Chicken - This bird can be found on many farms. It is the 
source of both eggs and delicious meat often served in inns. It 
poses no threat to humans, as it will generally run away if 
attacked.

Corpser - This creature is a type of ghoul that ensnares its 
victims with its tentacles in order to drag them off to its lair 
and presumably kill them in a manner that has never been 
discovered. Its only known weakness is fire.

Cow - This harmless farm animal is the source of beef and 
dairy products.

Cyclops - One of a race of incredibly strong one-eyed giants, 
when it is not hurling large boulders at its enemies, its 
favorite weapon is a large wooden club.

Deer - This swift but timid forest creature has sharp antlers to 
defend itself. It is the source of venison.

Dog - A domesticated cousin of the wolf, this animal guards 
homes from intruders, tracks game during hunts, and is a 
playmate for children and a pet for adults.

Dragon - Dragons are a mysterious ancient race of highly 
evolved reptiles that possess magical abilities and a high 
degree of intelligence. They have large wings and are capable 
of rapid flight. A dragon is formidable in combat and is all 
the more lethal due to its noxious flaming breath. Its lair is 
usually  a cave or dungeon where it guards its eggs and 
treasure.

Drake - This creature is a dragon that has not yet fully grown 
to adulthood, a process that takes several hundred years. Like 
its mature relatives, this creature can also breathe fire and fly. 
It is commonly found in the lair of a dragon.
Emp -  This extremely peaceful creature lives in the forest. It 
shuns violence to such a degree that it is doubtful it will want 
to have anything to do with any humans it comes into contact 
with. Some emps possess a remarkable degree of intelligence 
and magical ability. Emps are so named because of their 
empathic abilities. So sensitive are they to the pain and 
discomfort of other living things that they subsist on a diet of 
such foods as milk and honey.

Fairy - These flirtatious and mischievous tiny flying creatures 
are rarely hostile.

Fish - This generally harmless water-breathing creature can 
be found in abundance in the seas, rivers and lakes of 
Britannia. It greatly contributes to the local food supply.

Fox - This small, wily mammal is related to the wolf, but is 
not as powerful or aggressive.

Gargoyle - This red-skinned creature originally comes from 
the subterranean domain of the gargoyles. There are two 
classes of gargoyles - the larger winged gargoyles that possess 
keen intellect and magical ability, and the smaller worker 
drones that possess little thinking ability but are embodied 
with great strength.

Gazer - This strange creature is found mostly in dungeons. It 
hovers about, looking for victims to mesmerize with its 
multiple eyes. Upon being killed, the body of a gazer will 
break up into a tiny swarming colony of insects.

Ghosts - This magical spirit of the dead has the power to 
move through solid walls and has been known to use magic. 
It can appear anywhere, but tends to frequent graveyards or 
places significant to the life of the deceased.

Gremlin - This tiny creature travels in a pack and attacks in 
a large group. Its primary threat is that it likes to steal food.

Harpy - This half human/half bird creature nests in 
mountainous caves. It attacks from the air with the sharp 
talons on its feet.

Headless - This ensorcelled creature appears to be a living 
ambulatory, beheaded human being. It is unknown exactly 
how it compensates for its apparent lack of sensory organs, 
but it manages to do so quite well. Its favorite method of 
attack is strangulation.

Horse - This strong, swift animal can be found in the wild or 
domesticated in the stables. Horses are most commonly used 
for rapid transportation from town to town or through the 
wilderness.

Hydra - This creature is a type of dragon that possesses three 
heads. Like the dragon, a hydra also can fly and breathe fire.

Insects - This is an insect swarm capable of causing an 
intolerable number of bites and stings, as well as severely 
spooking horses and destroying crops.

Kraken - This mysterious peril of the sea is not well 
understood. There have been numerous reports of sailors 
being snatched from the decks of ships by huge suckered 
tentacles and dragged down to the bottom of the ocean, never 
to be seen again. No one has yet reported an actual sighting of 
the full body of this creature.

Liche - This is an extremely rare type of undead creature that 
is both dangerous and very difficult to destroy.

Mongbat - This bizarre and frightening creature is a cross 
between a bat and a monkey. Its attacks are fast and powerful, 
but it usually only inhabits the deepest dungeons.

Mouse - This harmless rodent lives on whatever little scraps 
of food it can find, although it is especially fond of cheese. It 
occupies the space just beneath the cat on the food chain.

Rabbit - This fast, long-eared animal lives primarily on the 
carrots grown by local farmers.

Rat (Giant) - This filthy, overgrown rodent is a severe 
hazard to the health of human beings. Immune to poison and 
too large to be trapped, this creature has a voracious appetite 
for garbage and carrion. When it roams in packs it loses its 
natural fear of human beings. The bit of a giant rat can cause 
a variety of potentially fatal diseases.

Reaper - The reaper is actually a malevolent tree spirit that 
has the power to reach out and grab passers-by in its long, 
powerful branches. The reaper also possesses the magical 
power to unleash destructive bolts of lighting. As it is a 
creature made of dry deadwood, it is quite vulnerable to fire.

Sea Serpent - This creature is a sea-going dragon. It is 
capable of spitting out fireballs, much the same as dragons 
breathe fire. A sea serpent can severely damage a ship with a 
single lash of its powerful tail.

Sheep - These non-threatening beasts are raised by 
shepherds, who take them out to graze in great numbers. 
Sheep produce both wool and mutton.

Silver Serpent - This creature, seen in the symbols of ancient 
Sosaria, once more holds the fascination of Britannia. The 
venom of the silver serpent is reported to have a strange and 
lasting effect on people. No doubt this shall be the subject of 
further study.

Skeleton - This is the undead reanimation of a fighter who 
was slain on the field of battle. Skeletons tend to cluster in 
hordes and are often following the commands of a sorcerer. In 
fact, they may continue to do so well after the sorcerer 
himself is dead!

Slime - This grotesque gelatinous mass lives in the depths of 
a dungeon or in the murkiest corners of a swamp. It 
reproduces by dividing itself and grows through the 
absorption of other slimes. Slimes attack by hurling foul blobs 
of slime at their intended victims. Fire is known to be a very 
effective weapon against them.

Snake - This creature spends the night coiled among the cool 
rocks and comes out into the sun during the day. This warms 
its blood, enabling it to strike more quickly. The creature is 
venomous and can even spit venom from several yards away.

Spider (Giant) - While this creature may be encountered 
anywhere in the wilderness, its lair is its giant web, which 
will almost always be hidden in a cool and dark place. A 
giant spider is capable of spraying its poisonous spittle from a 
considerable distance. Its bite is also tremendously painful.

Troll - This brutish creature is the bane of all travellers. 
Many tales relate how trolls hide beneath bridges in order to 
terrorize and prey upon all those who would cross it. The wise 
traveller would do well to exercise caution when crossing any 
bridge, especially those one may come across in the 
wilderness, far from the security of a city.

Unicorn - Fanciful stories of these creatures abound in rural 
areas. The unicorn appears as a splendid you white stallion 
with a single great horn rising from its head. Legends speak 
of how only those who are truly virtuous may approach a 
unicorn. Unicorn sightings are rare - so rare in fact that most 
serious scholars deny their existence.

Wisp - These mysterious floating lights have been a 
puzzlement to many an adventurer. They seem capable of 
inflicting only slight physical damage, but they also see 
impervious from physical harm themselves. It has been said 
that these strange creatures are very knowledgeable and that 
they come from a world other than our own.

Wolf - This plains and forest hunter has long had the greatly 
undeserved reputation of a vicious predator. While wolfpacks 
do thin the weak and the sick from the herds of wild animals, 
and while farmers must occasionally be wary of their 
curiosity, there is little to support the notion that these 
animals are bloodthirsty man-eaters.

The Book Of
Archaic
Knowledge
a historical look at the mechanics and use of the arcane 
arts
 before the end of the Age of Magic, 
as written by Batlin of Britain

Before anything further is written, it must be noted that the 
following section is included only as a matter of historical 
documentation. The use of magic has long been proven to be 
unreliable and the suspected cause of mental deterioration. 
The author takes no responsibility for anyone who may 
attempt to practice magic based upon the information 
contained herein.

i.  The Mage's Spellbook
The first component necessary for the successful casting of 
spells by a mage is his spellbook. It is his principle tool and 
without it the mage cannot function. This book contains the 
formulae and incantations required to cast the specific spells 
that a mage knows. As mages become more experienced they 
can acquire new spells. A wise and long-practicing mage may 
have a great tome filled with strange drawings, diagrams and 
writings. These writings will be explained in greater detail in 
a forthcoming section. Every mage's spellbook contains 
several basic magical spells called linear spells. These too 
will be explained in their own section.

ii. The Mage's Reagents
The second component required for spellcasting is the proper 
reagent. These chemical materials serve as a link between the 
physical world that the mage wishes to affect and the psychic 
energies of the ethereal waves that the mage is drawing upon 
to effect that change. Some reagents are relatively common 
herbs, others are rare and exotic items. The following is a list 
of reagents used by all mages.

Black Pearl
Black pearl is an exceedingly rare commodity; fewer than one 
in ten thousand pearls is black. They have been found at the 
base of tall cliffs on Buccaneer's Den. While a less than 
perfect pearl may be perfectly acceptable for decorative 
purposes, the black pearl of a mage must be perfectly formed 
or it is virtually worthless. Black pearl is ground up into a 
fine powder.

Blood Moss
In recent years the only places where this strange substance 
can be located are in the Bloody Marsh across the mountains 
from Cove (where many years ago thousands of soldiers lost 
their lives) or in the enchanted forest of Spiritwood, beneath 
the rotting bark of dead trees.

Garlic
Certainly this is the most commonly available of all magical 
reagents. There are few kitchens in all of Britannia that are 
not supplied with at least a few cloves of this spice. Garlic 
cloves are washed and ground into a paste, providing 
significant protection from harmful magic

Ginseng
The healers of our fair land have known of the healthful and 
restorative powers of this bitter root for hundreds of years. 
But to the mage it requires special preparation. It must be 
boiled and reboiled in the freshest of water no less than forty 
times! This reduces it to a strong-smelling syrup that makes a 
very potent reagent.

Mandrake Root
This rare plant extract, found only in the darkest, dankest 
corners of the foulest of swamps, is a most sought after 
magical reagent. It is also one of the most difficult of all 
reagents to prepare, for in being dug up the tap root of the 
mandrake plant must not be broken. Also, that root itself 
must be properly prepared, boiled and dried. Mandrake root 
can be found on the Blood Marsh and in a place known as the 
Fens of the Dead, south of Paws.

Night Shade
This plant, found only in swamps, only blooms at night. The 
fungal cap from this rare and unusual mushroom may be 
either crushed or boiled into a tea. The mage must always use 
great care when handling nightshade, for it is not only a very 
potent hallucinogenic, it is also extremely poisonous.

Spider's Silk
While this is a common reagent, it can be very difficult to 
gather any significant quantity of it from any single source. 
Mages have been known to frequent caves and crypts and 
even run their own personal spider farms in order to maintain 
an abundant supply of spider's silk. It usually takes at least an 
ounce of silk to cast a spell.

Sulfurous Ash
The great quantities of ash generated by a volcanic eruption 
makes this a common commodity as far as magical reagents 
go, but one does usually have to travel in order to acquire a 
large quantity of it. In recent years the most common source 
of sulfurous ash has been the Isle of the Avatar, location of 
violent volcanic activity many years ago.

iii. The Mage's Words of Power
The final component necessary for the mage to cast a spell is 
the spoken mantra that constitutes the words of power. Far 
more than simple memorization of the words and their 
meanings is required. The mage must have a consciousness-
altering comprehension of each individual syllable of a word 
of power. The pronunciation of each syllable resonates 
through the etheral waves as the spell is being cast. Incorrect 
pronunciation invariably causes ethereal turbulence. Long 
periods of meditation upon each syllable and many hours of 
controlled breathing exercises are required before the proper 
use of the mage's words of power can be learned. The 
following is a list of the known syllables that make up the 
words of power.

SYLLABLE	MEANING
AN..............Negate/Dispel
BET.............Small
CORP............Death
DES.............Lower/Down
EX..............Freedom
FLAM............Flame
GRAV............Energy/Field
HUR.............Wind
IN..............Make/Create/Cause
JUX.............Danger/Trap/Harm
KAL.............Summon/Invoke
LOR.............Light
MANI............Life/Healing
NOX.............Poison
ORT.............Magic
POR.............Move/Movement
QUAS............Illusion
REL.............Change  
SANCT...........Protect/Protection
TYM.............Time
UUS.............Raise/Up
VAS.............Great
WIS.............Know/Knowledge
XEN.............Creature
YLEM............Matter
ZU..............Sleep

iv. Spellcasting
The mage is able to cast spells when the three elements - 
spellbook, reagents and words of power - are combined in one 
unique and fluid action. The mind of the mage must be 
properly focused, as some spells affect just one person, other 
affect a group of people and still other affect a specific area. 
As a mage's experience in casting spells increases, so too will 
the potency of many of his spells. Outside distractions and 
interference, as well as the intended target's natural 
resistance, might prevent the successful casting of any spell.
	One factor over which the mage has no control is the 
state of the ethereal waves when a spell is being cast. While 
the ethereal wave are often subject to turbulence, such 
turbulence is a temporary condition.

v.  Magical Spells
Once again, the author takes it upon himself to warn his 
readers that the following is included as nothing more than a 
matter of historical record. It is a statement of absolute fact 
that most of these spells do not work and many will turn back 
upon the user. The use of magic is strongly suspected to be 
the cause of a strange mental deterioration than can affect 
anyone who has practiced magic. The reader is strongly 
discouraged from experimenting with the spells listed here.


Linear Spells
There are certain spells that a mage will immediately be able 
to learn upon completing his apprenticeship. They are called 
Linear spells because they do not directly correspond to any of 
the eight circles of magic that exist in the ethereal waves. 
Linear spells are the only types of magical spells that require 
no reagents to cast.

AN ZU (Awaken)
This spell awakens one sleeping or unconscious creature.

AN FLAM (Douse)
This spell extinguishes any small, non-magical fire.

BET ORT (Fireworks)
This spell creates an impressive display of multi-colored 
moving lights. When the mage becomes more experienced, he 
can use these lights to frighten his enemies, sometimes 
causing them to flee.

BET LOR (Glimmer)
This spell creates a small light source that lasts for a short 
period of time.

KAL LOR (Help)
This spell resurrects the mage and his party and teleports 
them to Lord British's castle, where they will be fully healed. 
Remember that this spell is usable only once by any mage.

IN FLAM (Ignite)
This spell generates a tiny missile of sparks that can ignite 
flammable material.

VAS KAL (Thunder)
This spell causes a single thunderclap to be heard, as if a 
terrible storm is imminent.

REL HUR (Weather)
This spell can create a storm or cause an existing storm to 
stop.

The Circles of Magic
There are eight circles of magical spells, each successive 
circle representing a more powerful level of magical energy. 
The ethereal waves are made up of eight rings or circles 
which correspond to the levels of the spells. Each circle is one 
of eight swirling vortices, all spinning one within another and 
expanding out through the universe. The more powerful the 
spell a mage casts, the deeper into the inner circles of the 
ether must the concentrated psychic energy of the mage 
penetrate. Required for the mage are many, many hours of 
meditation, the strength of concentration, and the will to 
reach into one of the higher circles with his psychic energy. 
Every mage is fully aware that a backlash would upset our 
physical world, possibly harming the mage and those around 
him.

The First Circle of Magic

VAS AN ZU (Awaken All)
Reagents: Ginseng, Garlic
This spell awakens all unconscious members of the mage's 
party.

IN MANI YLEM (Create Food)
Reagents: Garlic, Ginseng, Mandrake Root
This spell creates enough food for the mage and each member 
in his party to have one meal.

AN NOX (Cure)
Reagents: Ginseng, Garlic
This spell cures poison and restores a person afflicted with 
paralysis. It has also been known to work against an 
assortment of other malicious maladies.

WIS JUX (Detect Trap)
Reagents: Spider's Silk, Nightshade
This spell reveals the location of all traps within sight of the 
mage and his party.

VAS AN FLAM (Great Douse)
Reagents: Garlic, Spider's Silk
This spell is a more potent version of the Linear spell Douse. 
It extinguishes all dousable items within a certain area.

VAS IN FLAM (Great Ignite)
Reagents: Sulfurous Ash, Spider's Silk
This spell is a more potent version of the Linear spell Ignite. 
It will cause all flammable items within a certain area to burst 
into flame.

IN LOR (Light)
Reagents: Sulfurous Ash
This spell is a more potent version of the Linear spell 
Glimmer. It creates a source of light that will illuminate a 
darkened area. This light source can travel with the party and 
lasts for a significant amount of time.

IN WIS (Locate)
Reagents: Nightshade
This spell reveals the sextant position of the mage, even when 
underground.

The Second Circle of Magic

AN JUX (Destroy Trap)
Reagents: Sulfurous Ash, Blood Moss
This spell destroys any one specific trap upon which it is cast.

ORT YLEM (Enchant)
Reagents: Black Pearl, Mandrake Root
This spell causes up to an entire bundle of arrows or bolts to 
become enchanted and glow blue. Enchanted missiles will 
always hit their target and do significantly more damage than 
normal.

VAS FLAM (Fire Blast)
Reagents: Sulfurous Ash, Black Pearl
This spell causes great  jets of flame to burst forth from the 
mage and strike his target.

VAS LOR (Great Light)
Reagents: Sulfurous Ash, Mandrake Root
This spell is a more potent version of the First Circle spell 
Light, and has a substantially longer duration

VAS AN NOX (Mass Cure)
Reagents: Mandrake Root, Garlic, Ginseng
This spell cures the mage and all members of his party at 
once.

UUS SANCT (Protection)
Reagents: Sulfurous Ash, Ginseng, Garlic
This spell temporarily makes its subject more difficult to 
strike in combat, as well as rendering him invulnerable to 
traps and other hazards.

ORT POR YLEM (Telekinesis)
Reagents: Blood Moss, Mandrake Root, Black Pearl
This spell allows the mage to manipulate objects without 
touching them.

POR ORT WIS (Wizard Eye)
Reagents: Blood Moss, Nightshade, Mandrake Root, 
Sulfurous Ash, Black Pearl, Spider's Silk
This spell enables the mage to extend his sight out over great 
distances, passing through any barriers that exist between 
himself and anything he wishes to look at.

The Third Circle of Magic

DES SANCT (Curse)
Reagents: Sulfurous Ash, Nightshade, Garlic
This spell is a minor curse that temporarily makes an enemy 
easier to hit in combat, while making it harder for him to 
strike the mage or any member of his party.

MANI (Heal)
Reagents: Ginseng, Garlic, Spider's Silk
This spell heals half the injuries that its subject has sustained.

AN POR (Paralyze)
Reagents: Spider's Silk, Nightshade
This spell paralyzes an enemy in his tracks for a short period 
of time.

VAS WIS (Peer)
Reagents: Nightshade, Mandrake Root
This spell gives the Mage a look at the entire world as well as 
showing his location in it.

IN NOX (Poison)
Reagents: Nightshade, Blood Moss, Black Pearl
This spell enables a mage to poison one enemy.

VAS UUS SANCT (Protect All)
Reagents: Sulfurous Ash, Ginseng, Garlic, Mandrake Root
This spell is the equivalent of casting the Second Circle spell 
Protection on every one in the mage's party simultaneously.

IN ZU (Sleep)
Reagents: Nightshade, Spider's Silk, Black Pearl
This spell causes the enchanted person to fall asleep.

KAL BET XEN (Swarm)
This spell summons swarms of insects to attack the enemies 
of the mage from all directions.

The Fourth Circle of Magic

KAL XEN (Conjure)
Reagents: Spider's Silk, Mandrake Root
This spell summons a wild beast that will fight for the mage 
against any enemy.

ORT GRAV (Lightning)
Reagents: Black Pearl, Sulfurous Ash, Mandrake Root
This spell enables the mage to cast a bolt of lightning that 
will strike his target. This lightning is so destructive that no 
armor can protect its wearer from it.


KAL POR YLEM (Mark)
Reagents: Mandrake Root, Black Pearl, Blood Moss
This spell creates a magical (but invisible) "mark" on any of 
eight specific colored stones. The Fourth Circle spell Recall 
can then be cast on that stone.

VAS DES SANCT (Mass Curse)
Reagents: Sulfurous Ash, Nightshade, Garlic, Mandrake Root
This spell is similar to the Third Circle spell Curse, but it 
affects an entire group of the mage's enemies.

KAL ORT POR (Recall)
Reagents: Mandrake Root, Black Pearl, Blood Moss
This spell is a minor spell of teleportation. Casting it on a 
Marked stone takes the mage and his party back to where the 
Mark spell was cast on that stone.

WIS QUAS (Reveal)
Reagents: Sulfurous Ash, Blood Moss
This spell makes visible all things that were invisible within a 
specific area.

KAL WIS CORP (Seance)
Reagents: Blood Moss, Mandrake Root, Nightshade, Spider's 
Silk, Sulfurous Ash
This spell allows the mage to speak to all recently dead 
ghosts, until sunrise. If one were travelling to Skara Brae, the 
wise mage would have a healthy supply of appropriate 
reagents to cast this spell many times.

EX POR (Unlock Magic)
Reagents: Sulfurous Ash, Blood Moss
This spell unlocks magically locked items, including doors 
and chests.

The Fifth Circle of Magic

AN XEN EX (Charm)
Reagents: Black Pearl, Nightshade, Spider's Silk
This spell can be used either to ensorcell an enemy or 
creature into doing the mage's bidding, or to free one who is 
under the effects of a charm.

POR XEN (Dance)
Reagents: Mandrake Root, Garlic, Blood Moss
This spell makes everyone in sight (except the mage and his 
party) start to dance.

AN GRAV (Dispel Field)
Reagents: Garlic, Black Pearl, Sulfurous Ash, Spider's Silk
This spell can dispel any type of magical field, such as a Fire 
Field.

VAS FLAM HUR (Explosion)
Reagents: Mandrake Root, Sulfurous Ash, Black Pearl, Blood 
Moss
This spell creates a ball of flame that rushes toward the 
mage's intended target and explodes.

IN FLAM GRAV (Fire Field)
Reagents: Black Pearl, Sulfurous Ash, Spider's Silk
This spell creates a wall of fire between the mage and his 
enemies.


VAS MANI (Great Heal)
Reagents: Ginseng, Spider's Silk, Mandrake Root, Garlic
This spell completely heals an injured person.

SANCT LOR (Invisibility)
Reagents: Nightshade, Blood Moss
This spell renders the mage undetectable, not only from sight 
but to all means of normal detection. There are certain 
creatures that, for various reasons, are capable of seeing 
invisible objects or people.

VAS ZU (Mass Sleep)
Reagents: Ginseng, Nightshade, Spider's Silk
This spell is a more potent version of the Third Circle spell 
Sleep. It puts to sleep a group of targets that are not in the 
mage's party.

The Sixth Circle of Magic

QUAS WIS (Cause Fear)
Reagents: Nightshade, Mandrake Root, Garlic
This spell causes such a wave of fear that each man and 
creature who is not in the mage's party might flee as if in 
danger of death.

IN QUAS XEN (Clone)
Reagents: Sulfurous Ash, Spider's Silk, Blood Moss, 
Ginseng, Nightshade, Mandrake Root
This spell creates an exact duplicate of any mortal creature, 
who will then fight on the same side as the original.

KAL FLAM GRAV (Fire Ring)
Reagents: Sulfurous Ash, Black Pearl, Mandrake Root, 
Spider's Silk
This spell create a ring of fire that will encircle the mage's 
target.

VAS IN FLAM GRAV (Flame Strike)
Reagents: Sulfurous Ash, Black Pearl, Blood Moss
This spell creates a field of fire at the feet of all the mage's 
enemies that are within sight.

VAS ORT HUR (Magic Storm)
Reagents: Mandrake Root, Nightshade, Sulfurous Ash, Blood 
Moss
This spell summons a swirling storm that will randomly 
attack the enemies of the mage with powerful bolts of 
lightning.

IN NOX GRAV (Poison Field)
Reagents: Nightshade, Spider's Silk, Black Pearl
This spell creates a field of energy that will poison all who 
come into contact with it.

IN ZU GRAV (Sleep Field)
Reagents: Ginseng, Spider's Silk, Black Pearl
This spell creates a thick wall of energy field where the mage 
desires. All who enter this energy field will fall asleep.

VAS POR YLEM (Tremor)
Reagents: Blood Moss, Sulfurous Ash, Mandrake Root
This spell creates violent tremors in the earth that will cause 
the mage's enemies to tremble frantically. The effects of this 
spell will not inhibit the mage or his party

The Seventh Circle of Magic

REL YLEM (Create Gold)
Reagents: Mandrake Root, Spider's Silk
This spell changes a chunk of lead into ten gold nuggets.

CORP POR (Death Bolt)
Reagents: Black Pearl, Nightshade, Sulfurous Ash
This spell enables the mage to project a bolt of lethal energy 
at a specified target.

TYM VAS FLAM (Delayed Blast)
Reagents: Mandrake Root, Sulfurous Ash, Black Pearl, Blood 
Moss, Spider's Silk
This spell causes whatever it is cast upon to violently explode, 
destroying much of the surrounding area. The explosion is 
delayed long enough to give the mage and his party time to 
get out of range of the blast.

IN SANCT GRAV (Energy Field)
Reagents: Mandrake Root, Spider's Silk, Black Pearl, 
Sulfurous Ash
This spell creates an electrical field that protects the mage by 
harming all who attempt to pass through it.

IN HUR GRAV YLEM (Energy Mist)
Reagents: Mandrake Root, Nightshade, Sulfurous Ash, Blood 
Moss
This spell causes an electrified mist that flows from the 
caster, enveloping his enemies and harming them as long as 
they remain within it.

VAS AN XEN EX (Mass Charm)
Reagents: Black Pearl, Nightshade, Spider's Silk, Mandrake 
Root
This spell is similar to the Fifth Circle spell Charm, but it 
affects an entire group of the mage's enemies.

IN VAS POR (Mass Might)
Reagents: Black Pearl, Mandrake Root, Ginseng
This spell doubles the strength and combat abilities of 
everyone in the mage's party.

VAS MANI (Restoration)
Reagents: Ginseng, Garlic, Sulfurous Ash, Mandrake Root
This spell instantly heals all injury, dispels all harmful magic 
and cures all poison or paralysis inflicting the mage and his 
party.

The Eighth Circle of Magic

VAS KAL AN MANI IN CORP HUR TYM 
(Armageddon)
Reagents: Black Pearl, Blood Moss, Garlic, Ginseng, 
Mandrake Root, Nightshade, Spider's Silk, Sulfurous Ash
This spell is believed to be so powerful that it may be capable 
of destroying all known living things in the entire world. 
Fortunately, this spell has never been cast!

VAS CORP HUR (Death Vortex)
Reagents: Mandrake Root, Nightshade, Sulfurous Ash, Blood 
Moss
This spell creates a swirling black vortex at the point the 
mage designates, which will thereafter move at random. 
Everyone within this vortex will be continuously struck by 
lightning.

VAS SANCT LOR (Invisibility All)
Reagents: Mandrake Root, Nightshade, Blood Moss, Black 
Pearl
This spell is the equivalent of casting the Fifth Circle spell 
Invisibility upon the mage and everyone in his party.

VAS CORP (Mass Death)
Reagents: Garlic, Ginseng, Mandrake Root, Nightshade, 
Blood Moss
This spell causes everyone in sight (except of the mage and 
his party) to instantly drop dead.

IN MANI CORP (Resurrect)
Reagent: Garlic, Ginseng, Spider's Silk, Sulfurous Ash
This spell, when successful, empowers the mage to restore life 
in one who has died.

KAL VAS XEN (Summon)
Reagents: Mandrake Root, Garlic, Blood Moss
This spell summons a powerful creature that will fight for the 
mage and his party.

IN JUX POR YLEM (Swordstrike)
Reagents: Black Pearl, Nightshade, Mandrake Root
This spell creates a deadly pinwheel of eight spinning swords 
that sails toward the designated target.

AN TYM (Time Stop)
Reagents: Mandrake Root, Garlic, Blood Moss
This spell stops the passage of time for the entire world, with 
the exception of the mage and his party.

vi. Cosmology
There was once a time when much consideration was given to 
the phases of the moon and the movements of the heavens. 
There was much concern over an event, the reoccurrence of 
which is eminent, called the "astronomical alignment." It was 
said that the astronomical alignment would create a gateway 
between this world and another. In recent times the 
astronomical alignment has been all but forgotten. With the 
end of the time of magic, it is doubtful that such an event will 
have any significance to anyone but astronomers.
	During this time of magic, a strange form of travel 
existed, through doorways of light that were often called 
"Moongates." There were at least two types of Moongates - 
blue and red. Blue Moongates sprang up wherever fragments 
of extraterrestrial rocks called "moonstones" were buried. 
These gates allowed magical travel from one gate to another.
	Red Moongates are generated by the powerful 
artifact known as the Orb of the Moons. A red Moongate can 
take a traveller anywhere in Britannia. It has even been said 
that it can also be used to travel to other worlds. There have 
only been two red Moongates in all of known existence - one 
used by Lord British, and the other by the Avatar.
	Little is known about these gates, but like magic 
spells, Moongates no longer function as they once did. Use of 
Moongates today cannot be discouraged strongly enough. 
They are dangerous and their use in this less-than-reliable 
state has resulted in numerous fatalities.

                        Ultima VII
                      The Black Gate
                      Reference Card

Main Menu
After the game loads, an introductory sequence automatically 
begins, but it may be skipped by pressing [ESC] Then the 
main menu appears, listing four options:
	VIEW INTRODUCTION,
	START NEW GAME,
	JOURNEY ONWARD, and
	VIEW CREDITS.
To select one of these options, single-click it with the mouse 
or use the arrow keys and press [ENTER].To exit the 
introduction, character creation or credits, press [ESC].

VIEW INTRODUCTION
The introduction reveals how and why the Avatar has 
returned to Britannia.  Information presented here is very 
relevant to your quest.  This scene is the same one that you 
see the first time you run the game.

START NEW GAME
This is where character creation takes place.  It must be 
selected the first time you play the game.  When you are 
asked to name your character, type the desired name (up to 14 
letters) at the flashing cursor and press [ENTER]. Next, you 
determine the gender of your character.  With the mouse or 
space bar, select the gender of your choice and press 
[ENTER].

JOURNEY ONWARD
After you first create a character, this option takes you to the 
beginning of the actual game.  In future sessions, this option 
returns you to your last saved game.

VIEW CREDIT5
This option lists all of the many people who worked on 
Ultima VII.

Introductory Walkthrough
This section guides you through the first few minutes of 
Ultima VII.  It doesn't reveal any deep secrets, but it does 
introduce you to all of the basic actions you may perform in 
the game.  It assumes you are using a mouse, which is highly 
recommended by both lolo and Lord British.
	The scene opens as you, the Avatar, step out of a red 
Moongate into the Britannian town of Trinsic.  Before you 
stand your old friend lolo and the stable master, Petre.
	Conversations.  When lolo addresses you, read each 
line of text and then click the left mouse button ("left-click").  
Continue until lolo has finished speaking, at which point he 
automatically joins your party.
	Next, Mayor Finnigan approaches you.  Again, left-
click after each line of text.  Finnigan asks you to investigate 
the Trinsic murder.  Position your mouse cursor (represented 
by a green arrow) over the word "Yes" and left-click to 
answer him.
	Finnigan asks if you've visited the stables.  Put the 
cursor on the word "No" and left-click.  He suggests that you 
visit the stables and you can begin moving around.
	Moving.  You (the Avatar) are always in the center 
of the screen.  The stables are through the doorway to your 
north (i.e., toward the top of the screen).  Position the cursor 
so that it points upward (northward) and right-click.  You 
step to the north.  Continue moving the cursor and right-
clicking until you enter the building.
	Examining Things.  When you (the Avatar) enter 
the stables the roof disappears, allowing you (the player) to 
see inside.  A horrible murder has occurred!  You can look at 
each object in the stables by left-clicking on it.  Place the 
cursor over the gold key (lying just west of the body) and left-
click.  The word "key" appears (to identify it, if you couldn't 
tell what it was).
	Perhaps the key will provide a clue.  Move the cursor 
to the left of the key and click the right mouse button twice 
(,'double-right-click").  You walk to that location.  Notice that 
moving around is accomplished by right-clicking, and all 
other actions, like talking and examining objects, are 
accomplished by left-clicking.
Using Things.  You don't want to be disturbed 
during this investigation, so close the door by placing the 
cursor on it and double-left-clicking.
Taking Things.  The key may be a clue.  Place the 
cursor so that the tip of it overlaps the key. Click and hold 
down the left mouse button ("left-Click-and-hold").  As you 
continue holding, move the cursor around.  If the mouse was 
properly positioned, the key is attached to the cursor. Don't let 
go yet!
To give yourself the key, move the cursor (and key) 
over your character and release the left button.  The key will 
vanish.
Examining Yourself (and other things).  Find out 
if you have the key by double-left-clicking on your character.  
An image of your character appears (your Inventory Display), 
with blue lines indicating the locations of equipment and 
clothing.  The key is in your right hand.
Put the cursor on the large red check mark and left-
click-and-hold.  This lets you move your inventory window; 
move it to the upper right corner of the screen by dragging it 
in that direction.  Release the button when you are satisfied 
with the new position.
You can remove your Inventory Display by left-
clicking on the red check.
Talking to People. Perhaps your companion Iolo 
knows more about the murder.  To speak with him, double-
left-click on him.  His portrait appears, along with speech.  
Responses you may select appear in the center of the screen.  
Left-lick "Murder" to discuss the murder with him.
When you are finished talking to lolo, left-lick on 
"Bye" to end the conversation.
Further Investigations.  There are other things you might try 
while inspecting the stables.  It's a good idea to examine 
everything.  Be sure to check out the dead gargoyle at the 
north of the stables, as well as the bag lying on the ground.  
You can see the bag's contents by double-left-clicking on the 
bag.  Try removing items from the bag, such as the torch.  
Once the torch is on the around, you may double-left-click on 
it to light it. Double-left-click on it again to extinguish it. 
(Note that while the torch is lit you cannot move it  into any 
container.) In general, open the inventory of everyone in your 
party and both single- and double-left-click on every object.  
You may discover all sorts of handy things.
When you've finished here, you'll want to leave.  
You can walk continuously by right-click-and-holding.  You 
always walk in the direction the cursor points.  The farther 
the cursor is from the center of the screen, the faster you 
travel.

Luck be with you as you journey onward!
Commands
Ultima VII is an entirely mouse-driven game.  All action 
commands are controlled by the two mouse buttons.  
However, for those who do not have a mouse, all commands 
may also be performed from the keyboard.

USING THE MOUSE
The key point to using the mouse is knowing that the left 
button is used to perform actions involving the hands, and the 
right button is used to perform actions involving the feet.  
The mouse will generally appear in one of two forms: a green, 
straight arrow for normal activity or a red, jagged arrow for 
combat.

Action          Left Button     Right Button
Click           Look            Take One Pace
Double-Click    Use/Talk/Attack Find a Path
Click-and-Drag	Move Items	Walk Continuously


MOVING YOUR CHARACTER (RIGHT-CLICKING)
To make yourself walk, simply point the arrow in the 
direction you wish to travel and right-click-and-hold.  The 
farther the arrow is from you, the longer it gets, and the faster 
you travel.  To stop moving, release the right button.
When danger is near, your speed is limited in 
proportion to your dexterity.
Double-right-clicking on a point on the screen makes 
you walk to that location, providing no obstacles bar the way 
(e.g., a locked door).


MANIPULATING OBJECTS (LEFT-CLICKING)
The left mouse button is used to look, move, use or attack.

Look
To bring up a short description of an object, left-click on it.

Move
Many objects may be moved from one location to another.  To 
move something that is portable, left-click-and-hold on the 
object.  The cursor changes to a hand to indicate that you are 
holding an object.  Move the cursor over the desired 
destination and release the mouse.
Releasing the item over a character places the item inside that 
character's inventory.  If his Inventory Display is open, 
dropping the item on a container within the display places the 
item inside of that container (see Inventory Display).
If a container is not in anyone's inventory, it must be 
open (its display visible) to drop an item into it.
If an object is too heavy or too large to fit inside a 
container, or if you can't reach it, a message saying so appears 
in red above the object.

Use
To use an object, double-left-click on it.  Each type of item 
functions uniquely when used.  For example, using an unlit 
lamp will light it; using a lit lamp will extinguish it.
Some objects may be used on other objects (e.g., a 
bucket on a well).  Double-left-clicking on such an item turns 
the cursor into green crosshairs.  Moving these to the target 
item and left-clicking uses the first item on the second.
Double-left-clicking on many usable objects brings 
up a display that provides more information about that object.  
For example, double-left-clicking on a chest brings up a 
display that reveals the contents of the chest.  The contents 
may then be moved and manipulated like any other object 
within the world.  The bodies of fallen foes are treated like 
chests for these purposes.
In addition, the displays themselves may be moved 
in the same manner as moving an object - left-click, drag, 
release.  Single-clicking on the red check at the left side of 
the display or pressing [ESC] will close that display.
"Using" a person has several meanings.  Double-
clicking on a person while not in combat will initiate a 
conversation with that person. (For more information on how 
conversations work, see Screen Display.) However, doing so 
while in combat mode indicates that you wish to attack that 
person.  If you are clicking on a member of your party while 
in combat mode or while your Inventory Display is up, that 
member's Inventory Display will appear.
"Using" the Avatar will bring up your character's 
inventory (see Inventory Display).
To use a cart, double-left-click on a chair in the cart.  
Once all of the characters are seated, move the cart as if you 
were moving the Avatar.  A boat operates under the same 
principle, but you must double-left-click on the sails instead 
of a chair.  To stop using a cart or boat, double-left-click 
again on the chair or the sails, respectively.

Attack
While in combat mode, double-left-clicking the cursor on 
another person who is not in your party or on an object 
initiates an attack on that person or object.  If you are in 
combat mode, and in any attack mode other than Manual 
Mode (see Combat), you automatically attack any nearby 
hostile foes.

USING THE KEYBOARD
Though using a mouse is highly recommended, the keyboard 
may be used as a substitute if you have no mouse installed.

Walking
The arrow keys may be pressed to walk one step in the 
desired direction.  Holding the shift key down while pressing 
an arrow key will allow the Avatar to take three steps instead 
of one. if  [Num-Lock] is on during play, every step will be a 
triple one.

Manipulating Objects
Press [Spacebar] to make the hand cursor visible.  Now the 
arrow keys will move the cursor instead of the Avatar.  
Holding down [Shift] will increase the rate at which the 
cursor travels.
Treat [Ctrl] as if it were the left mouse button.  For 
example, a single "click" identifies an object, while a "double-
click" uses it.
If you are in any attack mode, there is no red cursor 
to remind you, but "double-clicking" still initiates an attack.

Displays
SCREEN DISPLAY
In Ultima VII. the entire screen is devoted to displaying the 
map.  Any messages or other relevant information appear 
over the game map, at various places.
During conversations, a portrait of the character are 
speaking to appears in the upper left corner of the screen, 
with ail of his text appearing to the right of the portrait.  If 
any Other characters interject, their portraits appear in the 
lower left corner of the screen with their text just to the right 
of their portrait.  During conversations, your portrait appears 
in the center of the screen, with your word options appearing 
to the right of your portrait.  Selecting a word or phrase from 
your options initiates a response from the character you're 
talking to.
Text that identifies an object appears just above that 
object.  Text that appears just above a character icon means 
that that particular character has spoken.

INVENTORY DISPLAY
When you double-left-click on yourself, your Inventory 
Display appears.  This is also true of any character in your 
party, as long as you have first brought up your own 
Inventory Display.
Dove/Flaming Sword. At the left of the Inventory Display is 
either a dove (non-combat mode) or a flaming sword (combat 
mode) icon.  Left-click on this icon to switch from one mode 
to the other.  During play, the color of the cursor arrow 
indicates whether you are in non-combat mode (green) or 
combat mode (red).
Containers. Double-left-Clicking on any container in your 
inventory reveals the contents of that container.
Disk. On the right side of the Inventory Display is a disk 
icon.  Left-clicking on this brings up a window that permits 
you to load or save a game, turn sound and music on and off, 
or exit the game.
Heart. Below the disk is a heart.  Left-clicking on this icon 
reveals the Status Display.
Numbers. At the bottom of the Inventory Display is a number 
next to another number (e.g., "24/36").  The number on the 
left is the weight that the character is carrying expressed as 
stones.  The number on the right is the maximum number of 
stones that the character can carry.  When buying items from 
shopkeepers, you are told if an item is too heavy for you to 
carry.
In addition to weight, items also have volume.  
Sometimes you are told that you cannot carry an item because 
your hands or your packs are full.  By rearranging your 
equipment (e.g. putting a weapon in your pack or buying 
another backpack), you may be able to carry the new item.
Current Attack Mode and Protected Halo are described in 
Combat.

SPELL BOOK
Double-left-clicking on the spell book in your Inventory 
Display brings up its display. To Cast a spell, double-left-
click on that spell's icon. To select a spell without casting it, 
left-click on its icon in the spell book. The buckle on the 
bookmark moves to that Spell.
There are six spells (Fire Blast, Paralyze, Lightning, 
Explosion, Death Bolt and Sword Strike) that may be cast in 
combat by double-left-clicking on a target as if attacking it.  If 
the spell book is in your hand and the book was closed while 
that spell was selected (the bookmark's buckle was on that 
spell), using the mouse to attack causes you to cast that 
specific spell (as long as you have the spell points and 
reagents necessary).  Also, if you (the Avatar) are not in 
Manual Mode and have your spell book ready (in hand), you 
cast spells automatically.

STATUS DISPLAY
The Status Display lists a character's current attributes, both 
primary and secondary, and whether that character is 
unconscious, poisoned, charmed, hungry, protected, cursed or 
paralyzed.

PRIMARY ATTRIBLITES
Strength, Dexterity and Intelligence are the primary 
attributer, With values ranging from 1 to 30.  The higher an 
attribute is, the better. The remaining attributes  are 
secondary statistics.
Strength determines several things, including how much you 
can carry, how much (if any) additional damage you 
do with a hand-to-hand weapon, and how many Hits 
you can take before dying.
Dexterity affects such things as how fast you are and how 
well you pick locks.  Faster characters can move and 
attack more often than slower ones.  Dexterity 
determines your Combat skill.
Intelligence determines several things, including your Magic 
skill and how well you cast certain spells.

SECONDARY ATTRIBUTES
Combat.  Your base combat skill is derived directly from 
your dexterity.  It determines how likely you are to 
hit in combat with normal weapons.
Magic.  Your base magic skill is derived directly from your 
intelligence.  It determines the maximum number of 
Mana points you can have.
Hits are derived directly from your strength.  They are 
reduced by damage, poison and hunger.  When your 
Hits reach 0, you are unconscious.
Mana records the current number of Mana points you have at 
that moment.  The less active you are, the greater the 
rate at which Mana points return.
Level indicates your overall prowess.  As you gain experience 
(see below), your level increases.  As your  level 
increases, you have the opportunity to raise one or 
more of your primary attributes.  In addition, Hits 
usually increase as your level does.
Experience points (Exp) are a measure of your 
accomplishments.  Every time you solve a quest or 
slay a monster, each member of your party gains 
experience points.  After earning the required 
number of points, a character's level increases.
Training points are accrued with experience points.  To 
increase strength, dexterity, intelligence, combat or 
magic, you must find a trainer who teaches expertise 
in that specific attribute. if you pay the trainer's fee 
and "trade in" training points (representing your 
study and practice with the trainer), the attribute you 
are concentrating on increases.

In the lower left corner of each character's inventory Display 
is an icon representing the attack mode for that character 
when he is in combat.  The following attack modes are 
available:

Manual                  You may direct each combat action.

Attack weakest          The character will attack the weakest opponent.

Attack strongest	The character will attack the strongest opponent.

Defend                  The character will be less effective at hitting
                        and more effective at dodging blows.

Attack nearest          The character will attack the nearest opponent.

Berserk                 The character will never flee, regardless of wounds.

Flee                    The character will retreat from any opponents in 
                        an orderly fashion.

Random                  The character will attack a random foe.

Protect                 The character will attempt to protect the party 
                        member in Protected Mode.

Flank                   The character will attempt to Flank the enemy 
                        (to either side).

If the Avatar's attack mode is anything but Manual Mode, he 
selects targets on his own (according to the rules of his attack 
mode) and fights those opponents without any further input 
from the player.  The player may override control at any time 
(by double-left-clicking on a specific target to attack it, right-
click-and-holding to lead the Avatar in a certain direction, 
etc.).
When not in Manual Mode, the Avatar does not 
select fleeing or disabled (sleeping, paralyzed or unconscious) 
targets on his own, and breaks off an attack once any of these 
conditions are met.  To make the Avatar pursue an enemy to 
the death, double-left-click on the opponent after it has 
already fled or been disabled.

Flee Mode
If a party member is seriously injured, he may flee.  Neither 
the Avatar nor party members in Berserk Mode will ever flee.  
Normally, fleeing characters might drop some of their 
possessions.  Party members who have been set to Flee Mode 
will make an orderly retreat and will not drop any of their 
possessions.

Protected "Mode" and Protect Mode
You may designate a party member to be protected by 
clicking on the "halo" just above that character's attack mode 
icon.  It turns gold, indicating that this party member is to be 
protected.  Only one person in the party may be protected at 
any one time.
Note that if you have not designated any party 
member to be protected ("turned his halo on"), an injured 
party member may turn his own halo on and call out to other 
party members for protection.  Any party members that are in 
Protect Mode will follow this injured character around and 
attempt to protect him.  Effectively, any protecting character's 
main concern is for the welfare of the protected individual, 
and he will fight anyone who attacks the protected character 
until there is no longer a threat.

Keyboard Commands

	C	Turns combat mode on and off

	I	Opens up the Inventory Display of each 
                party member, beginning with the Avatar.

	Z	Opens up the Statistics Display for each 
                party member, beginning with the Avatar.

	S	Opens up the Save/Load Window.

	A	Turns all audio effects on and off

	V	Displays a scroll showing the version 
                number of your copy of Ultima VII

	Alt-X	Exits Ultima VII and returns to DOS

	H	Changes the "handedness" of the mouse 
                by swapping the functions of the left and 
                right moues buttons. The left button is 
                now used to move around, and the right 
                button to manipulate objects. This "H" 
                toggle affects only the mouse, not 
                keyboard commands.

	Esc	Closes Save/Load windows, if it is open. 
                If Save/Load is not open, closes all open 
                displays and windows.


                        Ultima VII: The Black Gate 
                               Walkthrough

                          By Courtney McMillan

General Tips:

  You can only kill townspeople when they attack you.
  If the body in Minoc (see the walkthrough) is not 
appearing, return to a previous save, and WALK to 
Minoc.
  If you have the Forge of Virtue, solve it first. It will make 
the game a lot easier.
  To get rich quick, go to Buccaneer's Den as soon as you 
can, and party in the House of Games. Just do the 
number wheel, and pause as the numbers turn, and move 
your money accordingly. You will be very rich, very fast.

Walkthrough

Trinsic - You will be joined by Iolo, and then approached by 
Mayor Finnigan. Agree to investigate the murders and report 
back to him. Go into the stables and look at the body on the 
floor (Christopher). Get the key that is by the body, and the 
bag of gold and jewelry in the NW room of the stables. Talk 
to Petre about the murders.

Now go and talk to Mayor Finnigan about the key you found, 
and he will tell you to talk to Spark (Christopher's son). Go to 
the healer's (112S, 2E) and talk to Gilberto (a guard). Find 
out about the attack on him and the Crown Jewel. Talk to 
Johnson (the other guard) and discover more about the 
incident against Gilberto. Gilberto will tell you to talk to 
Gargan, the shipwright, about the Crown Jewel.

Go to Gargan and ask him about the Crown Jewel and 
discover that it sailed for Britain, but he doesn't know who 
was on it.

Now go to Spark's house (100S, 4E), and talk to Spark. Ask 
Spark about his nightmare, and he will tell you about the man 
with a hook for a hand and a wingless gargoyle (very 
important). Allow him to join the party (he will be tough 
later). Use the key from the body in the stable to open the 
chest in Spark's house, and get the Fellowship Medallion and 
the gold. You can use the hammer on the parrot to find out a 
secret treasure location (169S, 28E - just west of Serpent 
Hold).

Now go to the Fellowship Hall (108S, 10E) and talk to Klog. 
Do not wear the amulet you found at Spark's house. Klog will 
tell you he got into an argument with Christopher and that 
Christopher verbally assaulted Klog and his friends, Abraham 
and Elizabeth. Do not join the fellowship at this time. Now go 
and talk to Gargan again, and he will tell you about the man 
with the hook and a wingless gargoyle that he saw after 
sundown.

Now that you have all this information, go to Mayor Finnigan 
and report all you have discovered. Answer all the latitude 
and longitude questions and get the password to leave 
Trinsic.

Before you leave Trinsic, go to the armorer's and get some 
swamp boots, you will need them to get to Paws. Also, stock 
up on mutton at the The Honorable Hound Inn, the price is 
good, and mutton is the most filling food in the game.

When you leave Trinsic, walk north to go to Paws. The actors 
in the shack serve no real purpose, but listen to them to gain 
some insight into the Fellowship.

Extras: Go to the Armorer's and move the wooden shield in 
the main room and flip the lever you find there. Now you can 
get into the backroom of the shop
and get some weapons and armor.

Paws - When you arrive in Paws head straight for the 
butcher's shop (69S, 0E)(run by Morfin). Talk to Morfin and 
find out about the theft of his Silver Serpent Venom. Agree to 
help him find the thief. While in the butcher shop, move the 
bucket of blood on the west wall and pick up the key you find 
on the floor. This key will open the chest in Morfin's house. 
Now go to Morfin's house (which is just north of the 
Antiquities shop). Use the key from the butcher shop to open 
the chest and get the key you find in the chest. Take this key 
back to the butcher shop and use it to open the door to the 
north. Now use the key you found under the bucket of blood 
to open the chest in this room. When the chest is open, you 
will find a ledger inside. Use the ledger to read it, and then go 
ask Morfin about the ledger. He will say that he has sold the 
venom to people besides the ones he originally told you, but 
that it is perfectly legal for him to do this (blah, blah).

Now go to the Fellowship Shelter (58S, 8W) and talk to the 
people you find there. Alina will tell you about her wrongly 
accused fruit stealing husband Weston (who you will save in 
Britain). You will also talk to the lovely folks who run the 
shelter: Brita and Feridwyn. Brita is a shallow cretin who will 
tell you all sorts of gossip about the folks in town, and her 
husband, Feridwyn, is little better, although his info is a little 
more helpful for the small quests around town. You may meet 
their progeny, Garrit, who is a prince of a child. Just talk to 
him, and don't worry about what he spouts out. These people 
will tell you to talk to Camille and Tobias.

Go to Camille's house (53S, 8W) and talk to her and her surly 
son Tobias.

Now go to the shelter again, and Feridwyn will approach you 
and say that he saw Tobias with the venom and you should do 
something. Go to Camille's house again and she will 
approach you and say that Tobias is falsely accused, and tells 
you to go talk to Morfin. Go talk to Morfin at the butcher's.

Morfin will say that he doesn't think Tobias did it because he 
doesn't show signs of its use. Morfin says that Garrit has been 
acting odd, and dropped a key outside the shop. He will then 
give you the key (it is bright green if you check in your 
backpack, you cannot miss it).

Now return to the shelter and use the green key on the chest 
with the musical pipes in front of it. If you look in the bag in 
the chest you will find the snake venom vial. Take the vial 
and go find Garrit and confront him about it. He will admit to 
taking it and planting it on Tobias, and he will beg you not to 
tell his parents. Do so immediately. When you tell Feridwyn, 
he will bust Garrit, but still blame Tobias. Now go and talk to 
Camille, and tell her the good news, she will be happy. Talk 
to Tobias and notice the change in his attitude.

Now return to Morfin and give the vial back. Task done.

SIDE PLOT: Now go to the Miller's and talk to Thurston. Get 
him to tell you he is hot for Polly (who runs the inn). Now go 
to The Salty Dog and tell Polly what Thurston said. She will 
say she likes him too. Now go and tell Thurston what Polly 
said and he will start a courtin'. Task done.

SIDE PLOT: You can also ask Camile about wheat, and 
deliver it to Thurston for some money. Task done.

Go and buy the hourglass from Beverlea and keep a hold of it. 
Go to Britain.

Britain - Go and talk to Lord British. Talk about your friends 
and then Trinsic and tell him you learned something. He will 
tell you to see Clint (the shipwright) about the Crown Jewel, 
and Mayor Patterson about the murder. At this time you 
should also get the Orb of the Moons from him and learn 
about your stuff in the storeroom. Now go to Lord British's 
study, open the drawer of his nightstand and get the key you 
find there. Now flip the lever in the corner of his bedroom 
and make your way to the stairs and go up to the second floor. 
Walk to the NW corner of the castle and go in the storeroom 
and get your goodies.

Now go and talk to Clint, who will tell you that the Crown 
Jewel hasn't been in Britain for a long time.

When you talk to Mayor Patterson, he will tell you that there 
was an identical murder a very long time ago, and that the 
victim was Finster. Finster was running for political office 
and wanted to disband the Fellowship, and so had a lot of 
enemies.

Now go talk to Batlin and join the fellowship. He will send 
you to Minoc with a sealed package (you can open it, it 
doesn't matter) to deliver to the Fellowship office there.

Now go to the Avatar museum and steal the Virtue Stones (it 
won't hurt your virtue) so that you will have them to cast 
Recall spells (do this by setting the stone on the ground, cast 
Mark on it, and pick it up. When you cast Recall on the stone, 
and you will return there).

Now go to 2N, 48E and double click on the green fish by the 
cattails. Get the key inside and use this key to open Mack's 
Shed (22S, 26E) and get the Hoe of Destruction.

If you go to Selwyn's Tower (6N, 51W), walk to the North 
side of the tower and cast Telekinesis on the lever you will 
see. Go in and loot.

Now go to Cove.

Cove - Talk to Rudyom, and he will tell you about his black 
rock experiments. Take the Transmutation Wand and the 4 
blackrock pieces.

SIDE PLOT: Lord Heather is here if you need to get the bill 
from Miranda signed (about cleaning up Lock Lake). Janna is 
here, and will join you (free healing,
but it's pretty occasional).

SIDE PLOT: If you want, talk to Natassia and say you will 
help her. She will say her dad was killed near Yew. (You will 
solve this in good time.)

Now WALK to Minoc.

Minoc - It is best to walk to Minoc, if you cannot find the 
body that has been murdered, go to a previous save game and 
walk to Minoc, it should clear up the
problem.

When you get to Minoc, walk to the sawmill (63N, 73E) in 
the SE part of town. When you enter, there will be 2 hacked 
up bodies (just like Trinsic). Get the serpentine dagger and 
the Fellowship candelabra. Talk to Mayor Burnside about the 
dagger and find out who the victims are (Frederico and Tania 
who are gypsies). Now go to the gypsy camp (61N, 85E) and 
talk to Sasha. He says his parents were mad that he joined the 
Fellowship. Jergi will tell you the gypsies aren't welcome all 
over the place.

Now get Margareta to tell your fortune. She is a font of 
information but will charge you 20 coins, but it is worth it 
(and necessary). She tells you to find the Time Lord, but he is 
in trouble, so go talk to the wisps about it (in the Yew 
forests). She also tells you to talk to the Monks at Empath 
Abbey.

Now talk to Xantha at the artists' guild about the candelabra 
and she will tell you to chat with Elynor about it. Before you 
rap with Elynor, talk to Jakher at the training hall and find 
out about Frederico tossing a rock through the Fellowship 
Hall window (sounds suspicious huh). Now give the box to 
Elynor. The scroll inside talks about Christopher building 
something. Ask Elynor about the candelabra and listen to her 
story.

Owen, the shipwright, says he saw a guy with a hook 
creeping around town last night, and that the Crown Jewel 
was in town the night of the murders (aha).  Rutherford, at 
the bar, knows Hook is a pirate, and knows some interesting 
tidbits about the Crown Jewel. He also says the murders look 
like Hook's style (the plot thickens).

SIDE PLOT: You can also put Owen out of business by 
proving he builds unsafe ships (you get experience for this).

Now go to Paws (Elynor did say that was where they were 
headed).

Paws - Go and buy the hourglass from Beverlea and keep a 
hold of it. Now go to Jhelom. If you do not have money for a 
boat go and get the magic carpet at the entrance of Despise 
(9N, 30W). Hug the mountains and you will see the carpet on 
the ground. Take it and head for Jhelom. (Side note: Never 
fly over the Isle of the Avatar with the Magic Carpet.)

Jhelom - When you talk to Mayor Joseph, he says that 
Elizabeth and Abraham have set sail for Britain. Take the 
serpentine dagger to the Library of Scars (137S, 45W) and 
show it to De Snel. He will say that Serpentine weapons are 
from the Library of Scars, say it was stolen and attack you. 
Take him out (it is ok to attack folks if they jump you first).

SIDE PLOT: You can go to Sprellic's house (142S, 68W) and 
talk to him about the trouble he is in for taking the banner 
from the Library of Scars. You can have another made by 
talking to Klifton, the armorer, and have him sew another, or 
you can fight the duel for Sprellic by being his champion and 
beating up Vokes and Timmons. Either way, you win.

Dupre is at the Bunk and Stool (146S,, 64W). Go and get him 
and go to De Snel's house (133S, 45W), and get the key there. 
Use the key to open the locked room in the Library of Scars.

Britain second time - Go and talk to Batlin, and he will say 
that Elizabeth and Abraham have gone to Vesper. Batlin will 
send you to the dungeon Destard to reclaim some Fellowship 
money that were stored there. He tells you that you need to 
bring back the chest and the money. On to Destard.

Destard - As you enter, the first chest you see should be the 
Fellowship chest. When you open it, it will be empty. You 
will leave with nothing and like it.

SIDE PLOT: At the northern entrance, you might see Cosmo, 
whom Ophelia sent to Destard to get rid of.

At the southern entrance of Destard, if you are lucky, you will 
find Lasher, a unicorn. This is the only unicorn you will find 
to complete the Ophelia/Cosmo quest. It will not matter 
though because Ophelia doesn't love Cosmo, and just sent 
him for the unicorn to ditch him. Sad, sad story.

Go back to Batlin in Britain.

Britain third time - Batlin will ask what happened to the 
funds. Tell him your story, and that Destard has a bunch of 
monsters in it. He will let you join if you come back at 9 at 
night for the next meeting. Your friends will try to get you to 
not join, but don't listen. Go to the meeting, answer the copy 
protection questions, and get your complementary Fellowship 
medallion. You are in the club!

Go to Vesper.

Vesper - When you arrive, talk to Mayor Auston, and learn 
that Elizabeth and Abraham tried to set up a Fellowship 
branch, and have set sail for Moonglow.  He will also say that 
they were at the Britannian Mining Company for awhile. 
Don't worry about it right now, the plot will thicken.

SIDE PLOT: If you go into the Gilded Lizard and talk to 
Yongi, he will tell you how Blorn hates gargoyles. Blorn will 
ask you to go on a mission for him (it is pretty un-avatar like, 
but say you will do it. You are supposed to go and rough up a 
gargoyle, named Lap-Lem, for this bigot.) Lap-Lem will tell 
you that Blorn attacked him and stole his amulet. Go get the 
amulet from that schlep Blorn and take it to Lap-Lem.

NOTE: Be careful who you tell that you are the Avatar, some 
will try to beat you up for it.

Moonglow - This is a big town with lots of stuff to do that 
will encompass many trips. Here are the essentials of the first 
trip.

When you talk to Rankin at the Fellowship hall, he will say 
that Elizabeth and Abraham have left for Terfin.

While you are here, go ahead and deal with Penumbra. Go to 
her house (25S, 179E), and get in. To do this, you will have 
to read the plaque and put an item next to the plaque. Here 
are the clues, the items, and where you can find them:

1. Hammer here to enter: put a hammer down : Morz's 
house (53S, 177E)
2. Pick item carefully to keep going: put down a lockpick : 
Balayna's house (37S, 189E)
3. A glowing ring of truth lies before thee: put down a gold 
ring : The Lycaeum (42S, 180E)
4. Grasp not at threads: put down a spool of thread : 
Carlyn's store (37S, 175E)
5. The royal mint shall not hold thee back: put down a gold 
coin or nugget : Fellowship Hall (37S, 184E)

Now the door is open, and you may enter. Cast awaken on 
Penumbra, or use a potion, and wake her up. She will say she 
cannot help you until you shield her room with blackrock. 
Guess what? You should have 4 pieces of blackrock from 
Cove, and you may now place them on the pedestals in her 
room. She will now tell you that you need to get the Ethereal 
Ring. Cast the Mark spell here (you will have to come back 
when you get the ring later).

Go to Terfin.

Terfin - Go to the Fellowship Hall and talk to Quan. He says 
that Elizabath and Abraham have left for the Fellowship 
Meditation Retreat (its right by Serpent's Hold).

Talk to Draxinusom at his house (167S, 114E) or at the 
Tavern (179S, 120E). He is usually at his house. He says that 
Teregus raised Inamo (remember the
dead Gargoyle?), and will say you should tell Teregus. Do so 
at the Hall of Knowledge (165S, 118E). He is bummed but 
asks to hear if you find any more
out.

SIDE PLOT: Teregus will also tell you that someone is trying 
to destroy the altars of Control, Passion, and Diligence. He 
wants you to solve a mystery. Talk to Betra (181S, 117E) and 
learn that he and Sarpling have access to the kinds of stuff 
needed to do this deed. In Sarpling's shop (174S, 125E) you 
will find a powder keg and a scroll. Read the scroll and ask 
Sarpling about it. Sarpling will spill his guts to you. Now take 
the scroll to Teregus and he will tell you to go to Runeb. Do 
it, but get ready because Runeb will attack you. Take him out. 
Task done.

Go to Serpent's Hold.

Serpent's Hold - Serpent's Hold is a lot of fluff, but here is 
the scoop:

SIDE PLOT: Go to the kitchen and double-click on the fish 
until you find the one with a key in it, and take the key to the 
cave at 176S, 35E. Use the key to
open that chest and get the key to Richter's weapons closet.

SIDE PLOT: Save Lady Tory's kid by going to the Shrine of 
Honor, killing the harpies (no problem at this stage of the 
game) and get the kid. If you return
him, Lady Tory will be happy.

Go to Fellowship Island.

Fellowship Meditation Retreat - Ian will tell you that 
Elizabeth and Abraham have gone to Buccaneer's Den, and 
he will give you the key to the gate (this will only happen if 
you joined the Fellowship. If you didn't, you are in trouble). 
Do not worry about the off-limit caves right now, you must 
find the Time Lord (almost the rest of the game leads to this 
moment, so hang in there). Take yourself to Empath Abbey in 
Yew.

Yew: Go directly to Empath Abbbey (78N, 59W) and talk to 
Taylor. He will tell you about the Emps and how they can talk 
to the Wisps. But you are going to need a pot of honey, which 
you can get from the Bee Caves (57N, 54W), or from the 
Pirate Camp that is by Despise (20N, 6E). I think the pirates 
are easier, and you get to kill them if they are there. Taylor 
will give you a smoke bomb to deal with the bees if you 
decide to take that path to get the honey.

Now go to the forest and talk to the Emps (55N, 9E). Offer 
the honey and they will think you are swell. Tell Trellek you 
want to talk to Wisps, and tell him to join you and find one. 
He says he needs permission from Saralek, his wife. When 
you talk to Saralek, she will say you need to talk to Salamon. 
Salamon says it is OK if you get a contract signed by the 
logger, Ben, to stop cutting down Silverleaf trees.

SIDE PLOT: If you talked to Nastassia in Cove, Trellek will 
tell you about her dad, and you can return to Cove later and 
win her heart.

If you want, go to the High Court (82N, 51W) and read the 
Book of Records. It will tell you how Hook, Forskis, Sullivan, 
and Kreg are wanted felons. Now go and talk to Kreg in 
Empath Abbey and he will attack you. Take him out.

NOTE: If you get tossed in jail, get 40 gold off the dead body, 
and bribe Goth with 20 gold. Goth will give you the key to the 
cell.

Yew again - Go back to Yew and talk to Ben the Logger 
(43N, 47W), and he will happily sign the contract for you.

Take the contract back to Salamon and she will grant her 
permission. When you talk to Saralek, she will say she lied, 
and want to know what you want with
Trellek. After a lot of jawing, she will tell you that Trellek 
might be able to make a whistle to call the Wisps. Trellek 
does it.

Now take the whistle to the abandoned house (46N, 12W) and 
blow the whistle. The Wisp will show up and tell you the 
Time Lord wants to talk to you. If you want more info, he 
says you will have to get Alagner's notebook in New 
Magincia.

Go to New Magincia.

New Magincia - Go to Alagner (78S, 129E), and he will say 
he will give you the notebook, but you must give him the 
answers to the question of life and
death.

Katrina is here and will join you (up to you).

Go to Skara Brae and the Tortured One.

Skara Brae - when you get to the docks, cast Seance to talk 
to the ferryman. If you pay him 2 gold he will take you across 
the Misty Channel.

Once you are there, talk to Caine, the Alchemist and the 
Tortured One. He will tell you about Mordra and her plan to 
kill the Liche, Horace. Mordra devised a potion, and gave it 
to Mayor Forsythe who gave it to Caine. Caine's shop blew 
up. Caine also tells you about Trent and the cage he is 
building to hold the Liche while the potion is dumped on it.

Now go to Mordra's shop (48S, 62W) and talk to her and pay 
attention to her. Get a potion of curing, a potion of 
invisibility, Mandrake Essence (the glowing potion), and an 
empty vial.

Now go and talk to Trent the Blacksmith (45S, 67W). Listen 
to his tale of woe, and get the music box and take it to the 
Dark Tower(27S, 76W). Use the music box near Rowena 
(Trent's wife), talk to her and get the ring from her. Return 
the ring to Trent and he will agree to build the cage, but will 
need an iron rod.

Go to the Cemetery (50S, 60W) and grab an iron rod and take 
it to Trent. He will build the cage. Take the cage to the 
Alchemist Shop (37S, 63W) and put the 3 potions in the 
machine, and put the empty vial on the other side and light 
the burner. If all went well, you will have a new potion 
(sparkling blue) in the vial. Gather up the blue potion you 
made and the cage and head for the Dark Tower.

When you get to the Dark Tower (27S, 76W), go to the back 
of the tower by going through the fake wall by the stairs, and 
use the cage on the Well of Souls. Now go to the Throne 
Room and hang out until midnight and Horace the Liche lays 
down. When Horace lies down, put the cage over him and use 
the potion on him. The liche is dead, and you must return 
Rowena to Trent. Horace will tell you that you need a 
sacrifice to destroy the well of souls.

Now you must talk to Mayor Forsythe and he will say if no 
one else will sacrifice themselves, he will do it. Now you have 
to talk to EVERY person in town, including ones you have 
already talked to (Caine will give the answer you are seeking 
now. Caine says there are no answers, only questions), and go 
back to Forsythe. He will now sacrifice himself. Take him to 
the Well of Souls and make him do the deed.

DO NOT LEAVE SKARA BRAE WITHOUT CAINE 
TELLING YOU THE ANSWER TO LIFE AND DEATH 
(THERE ARE NO ANSWERS, ONLY QUESTIONS).

Go back to New Magincia.

New Magincia again - Go back to Alagner (78S, 129E), and 
tell him that there are no answers, only questions and he will 
give you the key to his storeroom. Go to the storeroom (85S, 
126E).

Open the storeroom's doors and go to the one on the left. It 
will teleport you near the right door. Now unlock the door in 
front of you and enter the room. Flip the switch on the upper 
left and pick the lock to the door in the hallway. Now go 
inside and flip the southern switch and get the magic bow (if 
you want), and flip the northern switch. Step on the teleporter 
in the newly opened room, and you will be teleported to the 
Left side of the storeroom. Walk near the door, and you will 
be teleported to the right side of the storeroom. Walk around 
the wall and step on the right teleporter, and you will be 
teleported to the left side. Flip the switch on the wall and step 
on the teleporter to the left. Get back to the center teleporter, 
walk around it, and walk north through the illusionary wall. 
Now, take the chairs off the table, put a crate down to climb 
on the table, and get up on the table. Once you are on the 
table, create a staircase of crates that is 3 steps high. Climb 
the steps and unlock the door. Get Alagner's notebook and 
read it. It tells you the Fellowship is a bad thing (surprise, 
surprise!).

Back to the Wisp: Go to the forest and give the notebook to a 
wisp (46N, 12W). The wisp will tell you to use the moonstone 
NW of yourself to find the Time Lord. This means placing 
the Orb of the Moons to the NW of you (diagonally) and 
using it. Go through the gate that appears and see the Time 
Lord. He says you will need the Ethereal Ring to accomplish 
some generator destruction. Lets get it at Spektran.

Spektran - Go to the Sultan Martingo's palace and kill his 
stone harpy to get the key to his vault. The harpy is easily 
killed by using a glass sword (the guardian's X in the desert 
(48N, 137E) has 2), or the Blackrock Sword (if you did the 
Forge of Virtue first), or use some invisibility rings (Selwyn's 
Tower). Kill the harpy, take the ring from it, and open the 
sultan's vault and get the Ethereal Ring.

Go to Moonglow.

Moonglow Again: Take the Ethereal ring to Penumbra and 
she will enchant it. Go to Dungeon Deceit.

Deceit - (3N, 177E) To get to the Tetrahedron Generator, try 
to walk into the dark areas of the walls and you will get there. 
When you get to the generator, leave all your party members 
behind, put the Ethereal ring ON YOUR FINGER, and arm 
yourself with a glass sword or magic weapon, and save your 
game. Fight the Ethereal monster (this guy is tough, so get 
ready), and then click on the box in the middle of the room 
and the generator will go down. If all went well, there will be 
a miniature Tetrahedron on the ground. GET IT, DO NOT 
FORGET TO PICK THIS UP.

Go to Yew.

Yew Again: Take the hourglass you bought from Beverlea in 
Paws (63S, 3E) to Nicodemus (67N, 54W), his house has the 
big chessboard by it, and get him to enchant the hourglass. 
Life is good, off to the Lake entrance of Despise.

Despise - Go to the entrance by the lake (9N, 30W), by the 
magic carpet, and cast a recall by the magic carpet. Now enter 
the dungeon and wander toward the Southwest until you are 
confronted with the Spherical Generator. There will be a 
moongate puzzle, and the answer is: RED, BLUE, BLUE, 
RED. Shatter the prism inside, and pick up the little sphere 
and get out of here. Recall is a good way to leave, walking is 
ok, but not fun.

Got to the Fellowship Meditation Retreat (by Serpent's Hold) 
for the last generator.

Fellowship Meditation Retreat - Go to the cave that is off 
limits, and enter it. The cube generator is here, but when you 
approach it, you will not be able to get in. Cast a Mark spell 
so you can get back here the easy way. Use the hourglass to 
contact the Time Lord. He says you need Caddellite to get in 
to the Cube Generator. Lets go get it at Ambrosia.

Ambrosia - Go to the Island of Ambrosia. It is located in the 
NE sea of Britannia (if you have the map that came with the 
game, it is under the compass on the map). Once you find the 
island, go to the cave (94N, 187E), and go through the 
tunnels until you reach the Hydra's cage. Open the secret door 
on the North side of the cage and enter. Kill the Hydra (it's a 
wimp). Now grab one chunk of Caddellite for each party 
member. You are done.

There is a house on Ambrosia, and YOU WILL NOT GET 
INTO IT, EVER!!! You can wait around for the magic fields 
to subside (they will, but it takes a long time) and then you 
will be able to cast some spells to get rid of some of the magic 
fields blocking your way to the other cave. It is not worth it, 
but just in case.... You know.

Go to Minoc.

Minoc again: Get Zorn the blacksmith to make the 
Caddellite helmets for you. Now put them on.

Go to the Fellowship Meditation Retreat.

Fellowship Meditation Retreat - When you get here, use the 
Recall spell and head for the Cube generator. If you have your 
Caddellite helmet on, you will be able to get in there. When 
you get to the center of the puzzle, shatter the prism, and pick 
up the little cube (you will need it to make people tell you the 
truth). The Time Lord will tell you that things are afoot and 
head to Buccaneer's Den.

Go to Buccaneer's Den.

Buccaneer's Den - Talk to Danag at the Fellowship Hall 
(81S, 53E) with the cube in your hand. Danag says all sorts of 
interesting info, but the important part is that Elizabeth and 
Abraham are on Avatar Isle, and Hook has a key for a special 
barrier on the Isle, and the key is hidden in his house. You 
can get to the catacombs one of two ways:

1.  Go to the hidden door in the Fellowship Hall and flip the 
lever there using Telekinesis, or
2.  You can ask Sintag, at the House of Games (84S, 64E), 
for the key to the catacombs, and he will give it to you. 
Use this key on the door in the House of Games and go 
forth to get stuff.

Once you are in the catacombs, go to Hook's room (it's 
obvious), and take the LARGE key and read the 2 scrolls. 
One talks of the Crown Jewel and its trek to the Isle of the 
Avatar, and the other is an assassination list that you are on.

Go to the Isle of the Avatar.

Isle of the Avatar - Once you get here, go to the entrance 
(165S, 170E). Use Hook's key on the double doors. Now that 
you are in the Throne Room, go to the upper left corner and 
walk through the illusionary wall there. Now flip the switch 
and the doors of the Throne Room will open.

Now head through the opened doorway, and you will come to 
a jail. Enter and kill the opponents there, and go to the room 
with the levers. The left and right levers select a cell door to 
open, and the center on open the selected door. Open the door 
to the far left cell (the one with the dead body in it and a 
barrel). Enter the cell and get the key from the woman's body, 
get the food out of the barrel and move the barrel and flip the 
switch there to open a secret pathway back to the main hall. If 
you cannot get the door to the lever room to open, and you are 
locked in the jail room, it is possible that you flew over the 
Isle of the Avatar on the magic carpet. If you did, and the 
guardian laughed, then you will have to go to a previous 
savegame BEFORE the guardian laughed. If you do not have 
one, then you will need to contact Origin Tech Support.

Use the key from the dead body to open the door in the main 
hallway. You will come to a lever puzzle. This is weird and 
hard to explain, but here is the sequence: 5,4,6,7,8. This 
should get you through the puzzle. Once out, go into the 
Northern room with all the fellowship members, flip the 
switch, and head East.

On the way around the river, flip the switch near the fire trap. 
Go into the teleporter room, flip the switch, and go into the 
Fellowship Hall. Kill everyone, and move the Fellowship 
medallion to open the doors. Now you will come upon a room 
with a knight statue in it. Follow the invisible pathway to the 
North until you come into another room. Go to the Eastern 
wall and enter the Illusionary wall. Enter the invisible 
pathway you find, go in it. Follow this path, and you will 
know you are on the right path if you can pick up a candle. 
When you come into a new room, step on the right teleporter. 
Go through the hallway, and the illusionary wall, and you 
will see the Throne of Changes.

Now, set down an item by the throne (something you will not 
need because you will not get it back. Remember what you 
put here, so you can tell the difference between all the 
Thrones you are about to sit on. Every time you sit on a 
throne, it teleports you to an identical but different throne). 
Sit on The Throne of Changes. Now get up and go through 
the illusionary wall to the South, and get the key out of the 
backpack. Go back to the Throne of Many Changes and sit on 
it. Now go through the illusionary wall to the NE, and sit on 
the throne you find there. This is the Throne of Virtue (it does 
not teleport you). Now get up and go back to the Throne of 
Many Changes again (you are now being teleported). Now go 
through the illusionary wall to the NW, save your game and 
step on the teleporter.

Now you are in the Black Gate room with Hook, Batlin, 
Forskis, Elizabeth, and Abraham. Attack them and kill who 
you can. Batlin will bail out after you kill Hook. Once death 
has been dealt, put the Tetrahedron, the Sphere, and the Cube 
on the pedestals. The light beams will be disrupted. Now use 
Rudyom's Wand to destroy the Black Gate. 

YOU WIN. TASK DONE.

                        Ultima VII
                      FORGE OF VIRTUE

                      A Guide to the 
                       ISLE OF FIRE



	Greetings, gentle scholar.  I have yet to believe my 
senses fully, for it seems but yesterday that I was within the 
Lycaeum walls investigating the rumors of this strange and 
wondrous isle.  And now I sit here in my new home, 
surrounded by history itself.
	Indeed, consider what significant history it is!  The 
very isle from which the fearsome Exodus began its assault 
upon Britannia.  The very isle that later housed the Three 
Principle Shrines of Virtue.  The very isle that sank beneath 
the waves several centuries ago....
	It is upon that island, the Isle of Fire, that I compose 
this document. Here, at the very floor of the sea, encased in a 
time-tested breathing enchantment of a mage I never met, I 
am privy to all that was spawned by the Age of Darkness.  I 
write this now as completely as I am able, for I know full well 
that, following much more exploration, I will be too 
engrossed in the many archaic splendors to keep detailed 
records.  Read on, fellow student of life, and be amazed.


HISTORY OF THE ISLE OF FIRE
My readers will forgive the sparse and vague details of my 
retelling, for all this is simply memories gleaned from weeks, 
nay months, spent buried in the depths of the Lycaeum: 
Shortly after Exodus' fall at the hands of the Stranger (who 
would later become known as the Avatar), Lord British 
created the eight Shrines of the Virtues.  In addition, he 
established three shrines dedicated to the Principles of Truth, 
Love, and Courage, which he had placed on Exodus' home 
island, known is the Isle of Fire.  While all of these shrines 
were crafted to benefit every citizen of Britannia, Lord 
British's primary concern was to locate a protector, an Avatar, 
to assist Britannia in times of need. indeed.  Lord British was 
planning the successor to the Age of Darkness - the Age of 
Enlightenment.
	In this dawn of the new era, Lord British begin his 
plans not only to locate the Avatar, but to ensure his agent 
could protect the Virtues as well is exemplify them.  Thus, he 
chose to guard the three Shrines of the Principles with 
creatures and traps, for only the Avatar should be able to 
benefit directly from their powers.  Commissioning a slew of 
mages and engineers, Lord British oversaw the 
implementation of these foils, along with the constriction of 
the actual Shrines.  In addition, he instilled within the 
Shrines the ability to adapt to the dynamic nature of the 
environment, thus insuring the tests would survive the trials 
of time.  Many months later, the island was ready.  The call 
for the Avatar Was sent out.
	However, while the search was still in its infancy, 
the island disappeared.  Well, sank really, but for reasons that 
are Still mysterious. (Actually, I suspect there is a correlation 
between this event and the Gargoyle's use of Exodus as a 
physical manifestation for Diligence.) When word of the 
island's misfortune reached Lord British, he thought both the 
isle and the Shrines lost forever.
	That is all I know, save for the location of the island.  
However, lest thou consider the legends false, consider first 
that thou art reading a document written from within the 
walls of the ancient Castle of' Fire!
Traveler's Guide
	At the moment, there is little hope of another ever 
laying eyes upon this watery land.  Although one could 
survive here, thanks to the envelope of air that Astelleron 
created to permit breathing, it is doubtful someone else could 
travel here Without possessing my vast knowledge in 
summoning and controlling giant sea creatures.  Doubtful 
that is, until I find the way to make this island rise again.  
When it is in its proper place, atop the Sea, then wilt thou 
share mine opportunity.
	Calling the Isle of Fire an island is a partial 
misnomer, for, thou dost see, there are actually three such 
islands.  The main land, upon which sits the Castle of Fire, is 
by far the largest of the three.  The castle is surrounded by 
mountains that contain several tunnels. judging by what I 
have seen, these dungeons were excavated to hold the various 
tests designed to challenge the Avatar, for all three of them 
can be reached from within the castle walls.  In addition to 
these entrances, the castle houses the Shrine of the Principles, 
in which can be found the actual three Shrines of Truth, 
Love, and Courage.
	The Smallest island holds nothing of interest, but the 
middle seems to possess as much of historical importance as 
its larger sister.  The eastern side is almost devoid of plant 
life, and the sand and rocks indicate this was once a small 
quarry.  Perhaps this is where Astelleron fabricated the 
legendary stone guardians of the Shrines.  Nearby his shack, 
also preserved by the air bubble.  My exploration has been 
cursory thus far, but the books I saw in the house indicate an 
educated individual.  More confirmation for my hypothesis?  
There are two caves in the area, as well as a Moongate 
leading to and from the main island.  The east cave exits into 
the open air, but this area is enchanted, and teleports me to a 
tunnel leading to a secluded glade.  I cannot yet place the 
recollection, but I am sure the grouping of stones, with a tree 
taking root in the center one, is familiar to me.  Perhaps when 
I have seen more detail I will record my observations, but for 
now, this sums up my knowledge of the geographical aspects 
of the island.

THE BESTIARY
There is little remarkably different about most of the animals 
of the Isle of' Fire- I have seen the rodents and the deer and a 
few members of the avian species.  And, in fact, the castle 
walls are scorched in places - the aftermath of a dragon's 
assault upon the castle.  The dragon has taken up residence 
here in one the tunnels of the main cave.  During her raid, 
she stole from me the Ether Gem, a possession of reasonable 
importance.  As soon as I can find a way to retrieve it, her 
head shall be mine.
	However, I digress.  By far the most intriguing 
creatures I have come across are the stone golems.  I had 
heard nothing more than mere rumors prior to my arrival 
here, but seeing the mobile masses of rock have convinced me 
of their existence.  Astelleron was quite a master, indeed, for 
his workmanship is beautiful.  I know nothing of their- 
sentience, for they have never spoken to me.  To be honest, I 
am not even sure they are aware of my intrusion, for I have 
yet to venture near one of the Shrines.  I hope soon to journey 
back to what I have assumed is Astelleron's hovel and learn 
more about their creation, but that will come after my other 
research.  Regardless of how the golems were constructed, I 
am confident more than an ordinary sword would be 
necessary to Stop them.

HELPFUL OBSERVATIONS
I have had a bit more time to view the island now.  There is 
too much to see and record, but I will put down what I can 
before something else reclaims my fancy.  Having noticed 
that the silent stone guardians had left the Shrine room 
unattended after the dragon's attack, I decided to inspect the 
three statues.
	I first spoke with the haggard old man, presuming 
he, or- rather it, would represent Truth.  I was not 
disappointed.  I was, however, surprised, for upon initiating 
conversation (after all, what else should one do with a Shrine 
of the Principles?), I found myself magically teleported inside 
one of the dungeons.  I chose not to explore, for I hastily 
remembered a tome to which I was in a hurry to get back.  
However, I was reminded of an ancient piece of wisdom: 
never trust the obvious; always took for that which is not 
there.  Afterwards I stepped back into a Moongate and 
returned to the Shrine room.
	I learned little from the Shrine of Love, so I set out 
through one of the Moongates south of the Shrine room, 
found behind a secret door.  I arrived back on the smaller isle.  
Entering the western cave, I passed by several barrels and 
some supplies, obviously left over from Astelleron's days 
there.  Passing his shack, I noticed a golem Standing near the 
quarry remains.  He was staring at one of "his" fellows, who 
had taken a very bad fall, it seemed.  I stole by them and 
entered the Other cave.  Passing into a small outside opening, 
I was teleported into the passage leading to the little glade I 
had seen earlier.
	As I spied the rocks and the tree again, I was able to 
place both.  The rocks ,were denoting the legendary Stone of 
Castambre, and the tree was none other thin its 
accompanying Tree of Life.  Beyond a doubt this was one of 
Astelleron's sources for powering his awesome golems.  I 
must locate his journals an to read more, but - if my memory 
serves- the Tree of Life likely supplied not only the blood for 
his magicks, but the "hearts" as well.
	Later I investigated the other moongate within the 
Castle of Fire.  This one led to yet another labyrinth. I saw 
more golems here than in either of the other two dungeons, 
and remember seeing at least one man. However, he seemed 
no more interested in me then I was in him, so we both 
ignored each other.  Peering around a corner, I caught sight 
of a huge and magnificent dragon - doubtless the one I 
encountered earlier.  Behind her was a door. I cannot guess 
what lay beyond, but her protective nature was probably 
indicative if its importance.  Though I am too busy to waste 
time testing my idea, I expect the dragon would be quite 
difficult to conquer.
	Now, before I continue I must pause to jot down a 
new idea.  I believe this will permit me to lengthen the time 
of most movement-based spells.  All I need to do is increase 
the proportion of spider silk in relation to the amount of blood 
moss I have and...
	I have discovered something of terrible interest.  The 
dark cylinder I found on the second floor is more magical 
than I first detected.  I have touched it, symbolically speaking, 
for it lives.  Well, not is a man or a plant, but as in 
embodiment of powerful energy.  I have not fully determined 
this, but I suspect this is the remains of the infamous core of 
Exodus.  When I have completed my studies and returned to 
the surface world, I must seek out the great lenses to the void 
and view the Book of Infinite Wisdom.  There I will be able 
to confirm my suspicions.
... Another flash!  Perhaps, were I to combine the lenses in an 
alternate manner, I could amplify the effects and bring other 
objects from the void into being.  Then I could...

CONCLUSION
I expect that if thou art perusing these pages then I have 
already bade the island arise. I hope my guides and warnings 
are of use to thee. As I plan to be around for a long time, or 
at least expect my enchantments to, I request that thou dost 
locate my soon, for there is no doubt this journal will be 
lacking. At such a time, I will do my best to break from my 
studies and be civil enough to provide further assistance. 
Until then, gentle reader, I wish thee good will and good luck 
in finding and sharing this history with me.

                        Ultima VII
                     Forge of Virtue
                       Walkthrough


INTRODUCTION

You should see the screen shake upon running the game with 
Forge of Virtue installed. A party member will interject that 
Lord British may know the cause of the tremors. Solve the 
Trinsic murder, if necessary. Travel to Britain and speak with 
Lord British. He will tell you of the Isle of Fire, home of 
Exodus, and that he erected three Shrines to the Principles 
there, and that these shrines were only to be used by an 
Avatar. Get the equipment Lord British has put aside for you, 
if necessary. Lord British will also give you a ship, the 
Golden Ankh, which is anchored in Vesper. Travel to Vesper. 
Board the Golden Ankh and sail due south of Vesper until 
you run into mountains. Follow the shoreline until you can 
sail north between two peaks. You should come to a beach. 
This is the only place on the Isle of Fire that you may 
disembark. Do so, and go north into the ruined castle.


THE ISLE OF FIRE

Go into the northwest corner of the castle. There you should 
meet Erethian, the blind mage. Talk to him. Nice guy, isn't 
he? Read every book and scroll in Erethian's room to learn 
about Exodus, the evil entity that once controlled this Isle, 
and the Dark Core that was the source of his power. Pick up 
the Scroll of Infinity (the scroll is a fun read if you are a 
programmer). Go into the northeast corner of the castle and 
examine the Dark Core ( a tall black cylinder). Examine the 
mirror, and talk to the demon Arcadian who is trapped inside. 
Agree to help Arcadian. Go into the north hall of the castle.

THE TEST OF TRUTH

Talk to the center statue (it should look like a wise old man). 
Agree to take the statue's test. You will be teleported to a 
small room with two plaques on the west wall. Go south 
through the illusion wall. The passage will bend west and 
come out into a large room with a dead body in the center. Do 
not touch or walk over the body or you will be struck by 
lightning from the four corners of the room. Go west out of 
the room. In the hall you should find a hood on the floor. 
Stand on the hood and walk north through the illusion wall. 
The passage will bend east, then north and come out at a 
small room. Flip the switch to lower the door. Walk into the 
next room and pick up the real Talisman of Truth (black 
semi-circle with a blue ribbon). You will be teleported back to 
the main hall and your Intelligence and Magic stats will be 
raised to thirty each. The statue will tell you that the Psyche 
of Exodus is attempting to return to the Core.

THE TEST OF LOVE

Talk to the left statue (it should look like a beautiful woman). 
Return to Erethian's room and double-click on the east wall of 
the northeast corner. A secret door will open. Go through it 
and walk into the moongate. You will emerge in a small 
glade ringed by mountains. Pick up the bucket next to the 
well. Walk southwest to the hut. Go inside the hut and read 
all the books. To the west of the hut is a mine shaft that 
contains several powderkegs and a pick, none of which is 
necessary. Go east to the sandy part of the island. There you 
should meet Bollux, a sentient stone golem, and his brother 
Adjhar, who lies broken on the ground. Talk to Bollux and 
agree to help Adjhar. Bollux will give you the book The Stone 
of Castambre. Read it. A scroll (the Vas Flam Uus scroll) will 
fall out, make sure you pick it up right away. Go north of the 
sandy area to another mine shaft. As soon as you enter, turn 
east. At the first opportunity, turn south. You should emerge 
into a small open patch of ground. Pick up the pick lying 
there (and the backpack, if you need it) and step into the 
center of the patch. You will be teleported. Go south down the 
hallway, then west, then south. You will emerge at the Stone 
of Castambre (believe me, you can't miss it). Put the bucket 
on the ground next to the south face of the stone. Open your 
character sheet. Put the pick in your hand and double-click on 
it. The character sheet will disappear. Click on the tree 
growing out of the stone and the bucket should fill with 
blood. Pick up the bucket and return to the Golems. Use the 
bucket of blood on each of the five stones surrounding 
Adjhar. Read the Vas Flam Uus scroll. A party member will 
interject that a "heart" stone is still needed. Bollux will pull 
his own out, drop it on Adjhar's body, and fall over dead. 
Open Adjhar's inventory (double-click on him). Put the stone 
into his inventory. Read the Vas Flam Uus scroll (make sure 
none of your party members are standing on the rocks). 
Lightning will strike the five rocks, and they will catch on 
fire. Adjhar will return to life. Talk to Adjhar and tell him 
what happened (say "sacrifice"). Adjhar will ask you for the 
book The Stone of Castambre.  Give it to him. He will then 
tell you that Bollux' sacrifice, though extremely noble, was 
unnecessary. He will send you back to the stone to collect a 
heart for Bollux, as well as more blood. Return to the Stone 
and place the bucket as before. Put the pick in your hand and 
double-click on it as before. Click on the stone to cut a new 
heart. Double-click on the pick again and click on the tree to 
collect more blood. You will see the tree die. Return to the 
sandy area and perform the ritual again, putting the heart into 
Bollux' inventory and the blood on the rocks. Read the scroll. 
Bollux should return to life. Talk to Adjhar. He will thank 
you. Ask him about the Talisman of Love and he will give it 
to you. It's a black semi-circle with a yellow ribbon. When 
you have it you will be teleported back to the Isle of Fire. The 
statue will congratulate you and raise your Dexterity and 
Combat stats to thirty, and then tell you that Exodus will soon 
threaten Britannia again.

THE TEST OF COURAGE.

Talk to the right statue (it should look like a fierce warrior in 
a greathelm). Return to the room with the Dark Core in it, go 
through the passage to the northwest, and go through the 
moongate. Go south out of the room you appear in. Pick the 
first gate you come to (there is no key to it). Go south, the 
passage will turn east, and you will come into a grotesque 
room full of skeletons and headlesses. In the center is a mage 
that is about to summon a liche. Let him summon it, then kill 
him and everything else in the room except the liche. It can't 
get to you, and you don't want to mess with it anyway. Open 
the mage's inventory and get his key (he WILL NOT have the 
key on him if he didn't summon the liche). The key opens the 
gate to the east, which is guarded by two stone golems. Fight 
them, or run through the gate and lock it behind you. The 
passage will turn north, and then come to a four-way passage. 
You will notice that the west passage is blocked by two stone 
walls. Go north. The passage will turn west. Kill the dread 
spiders and flip the lever at the end of the passage. Return to 
the four-way junction. Go east. The passage will turn north. 
Kill the giant scorpions and flip the lever at the end of the 
passage. Return to the four-way junction. The west passage is 
now clear. Go west. This is a good place to save your game. 
The passage will turn north. There will be two side passages, 
a lower one to the west and a higher one to the east, and a 
door at the end, which happens to be locked. Go into the west 
passage. The passage will turn north, a door will drop as you 
approach, and you will walk into a room with a crystal ball. 
Look into the crystal ball and note where you see the glass 
sword. Return to the north hallway. Go into the east passage. 
Did I forget to mention that this is a dragon's lair? Run past 
the dragon, open the chest and get the glass sword. Do NOT 
use the glass sword on the dragon unless you have another 
one! Return to the west passage and put the glass sword on 
the floor just where you saw it in the crystal ball. The crystal 
ball will turn into a key. Use the key on the door at the north 
end of the hall. If you did not kill the dragon, use the key to 
lock the door behind you. Go north, then east through the 
doorway. Go north in the inner hall and you should come to a 
small room with a magic helm on a pedestal. Get it, then 
head south. Kill or evade the stone golem and follow the 
passage as it turns east. Double doors will drop as you 
approach, and you will have to deal with another golem. Once 
past the doors, go south. The passage will turn east, and you 
should run into slimes, gremlins, and rats. As the passage 
turns north again, you should run into a gazer. Kill it, then go 
through the doorway to the west. Go north from the doorway 
to another small room, this time with a normal helm on a 
pedestal. Get the normal helm, and leave the magic helm on 
the pedestal. Return to where you got the magic helm and put 
the normal helm on the pedestal. You should hear grinding 
noises. Go south, then west through the doorway. Go north 
and you should run into a family of trolls with their cyclops 
buddy. Let them have it, then head east. You should see 
where the doors were that you dropped by swapping the 
helms. Go north through the doorway. Did I fail to mention 
that you just stepped into another dragon's lair? I've GOT to 
start remembering to tell you these things. Talk to the dragon 
Dracothraxus, and he will tell you that you cannot kill him, 
for he has been made immortal by the Keeper of the Test of 
Courage. Defeat Dracothraxus in combat; do NOT use any 
magic on him. A glass sword is your best bet. Once you've 
done it, he will tell you that you have merely bested, not truly 
defeated him, and that you will not pass the test until you find 
a way to kill him. He will offer you a present for besting him. 
Accept it. Go back the way you came into the dungeon, and 
leave through the moongate in the first room.

THE BLACK SWORD

Talk to Erethian about Dracothraxus. In the course of the 
conversation, he will mention that one of his hobbies was 
attempting to create a powerful sword made of pure 
blackrock. He will not mention this sword if you defeated 
Dracothraxus with magic. Agree to continue his work. He 
will teleport both of you into the center of the south hall, and, 
after a few mishaps, create blacksmith tools for you to use to 
forge the sword. Use the bucket on the well and then on the 
trough three times to fill the trough. Put the hammer in your 
hand. Place the sword blank for the black sword (it should be 
a mottled gray all down its length) on the center of the forge, 
and use the bellows continuously until the center of the sword 
is almost white. Quickly move the sword to the anvil and use 
the hammer on it. Continue heating the sword on the forge 
and then hammering it on the anvil until the Avatar remarks 
that the blade is as well-worked as it can be, but that it is still 
too heavy to be used as a melee weapon. Use the blade on the 
water trough to cool it. It should now be an even gray, fading 
into black at the hilt. Talk to Erethian again, and he will tell 
you that a powerful magic force could make the blade into a 
workable weapon. Mention the gem you got from 
Dracothraxus and he will tell you that it is a portable demon 
prison, and that using the power of Arcadian might indeed fix 
the weapon. Return to Arcadian's mirror and talk to him. He 
will see the gem and beg you to free him. Put the gem in your 
hand and use it on the mirror. Arcadian will be freed, and 
begin to gloat that he will soon kill Lord British and rule 
Britannia. Then the gem will trap him. Hold the gem in one 
hand and the sword in the other. Talk to the gem and say 
"bind". Arcadian will bind the gem to the sword and the 
Black Sword will be created. Return to the Courage dungeon 
and go back to Dracothraxus' lair. Talk to the Sword and say 
"powers" and "death". Click on Dracothraxus. After a short 
conversation Dracothraxus will die. Walk north through the 
now-open door. Ignore the golems and take the Talisman of 
Courage (black semi-circle with a red ribbon). You will be 
teleported out of the dungeon and the statue will raise your 
Strength and Hitpoint stats to thirty each. The statue will then 
tell you of the need for the Talisman of Infinity.

THE TALISMAN OF INFINITY

Talk to Erethian about the Talisman of Infinity. He will tell 
you what he knows and that more information can be found 
in the Scroll of Infinity. Give him the scroll. He will begin to 
tell you what it says, then stop when he sees what the 
Talisman will be used for. He won't talk to you again. 
Fortunately, Arcadian knows a little more about how to make 
the Talisman, including the fact that it requires the two lenses 
used to view the Codex. Return to Britain by ship or with the 
moonstone. The lenses should be in the Royal museum, just 
south of the Conservatory. Take them. Return to the Isle of 
Fire by boat or by using the Black Sword's "Return" power. 
Go to the Dark Core room. Place the three Talismans that you 
have on the Dark Core so that they make a three-quarter 
circle with the missing quarter at the top. Place the lenses on 
the right and left side so that they are one space sway from 
the core. The best way to do this is to place them right next to 
the Core, then move them one space away. If everything is in 
place, the Talisman of Infinity will appear automatically. It 
should be silver with a white ribbon. Before you can pick it 
up, Erethian will teleport in. He will attempt to destroy the 
Talisman of Infinity, miscast his spell badly, and end up 
destroying the Dark Core, all four Talismans, and himself.

AND LAST

Return to Britain and speak with Lord British. He will tell 
you that Exodus has fully passed from the world, and reward 
you by raising your Strength and Hitpoints to sixty each. The 
Forge of Virtue is now complete.

NOTES

1. In the Test of Love, there is a hidden lever just above the 
Stone of Castambre. Keep clicking just above the stone until 
you see the Avatar walk over and bend down. Go north into 
the hall, then east. There should be a new south passage. 
Walk into it to find a Death Scythe, a Firedoom Staff, and a 
dead body with nine Glass Swords on it. These are invaluable 
in the Courage Dungeon.

2. In the mage's room in the Courage Dungeon, one body in 
the southeast corner has Magic Armor and a Magic Gorget on 
it. A body in the southwest corner has Magic Gauntlets. The 
door just north of the dragon's lair has a barrel behind it with 
food in it.

3. The spell Erethian attempts to use to destroy the Talisman 
of Infinity translates as "Great Negation of Magic Matter". A 
common name for it would probably be Destroy Artifact.

4. The Black Sword is the first weapon in the Ultima series 
that is intentionally capable of killing Lord British. You 
should try it once, just to read Lord British's will.

5. The Black Sword's full powers:

  It is the strongest melee weapon in the game.
  It can cast Explosion anywhere in the room at no cost to you.
  Arcadian can replenish your Magic Points at almost any time.
  It can kill very powerful beings at once using the Death power.

Its drawbacks:

It must be charged by killing, so the sword forces you to kill 
even when you don't really have to. Its Death power has a 
limited range, which means you have to get very close to a 
very powerful monster to use it.

